{"21":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Burzahom in the Kashmir Valley is a prominent Neolithic site. The people here lived in pit dwellings (dug into the earth to avoid the cold) and had a unique burial practice where domestic dogs were buried alongside their masters.","explanation_hi":"कश्मीर घाटी में बुर्जहोम एक प्रमुख नवपाषाण स्थल है। यहाँ के लोग गर्त-आवासों (ठंड से बचने के लिए जमीन में खोदे गए गड्ढे) में रहते थे और यहाँ शवाधान की एक अनूठी प्रथा थी जहाँ पालतू कुत्तों को उनके मालिकों के साथ दफनाया जाता था।"},"22":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Ash mounds are a distinctive feature of the South Indian Neolithic culture (found at sites like Utnur, Kupgal, Piklihal, and Maski in Karnataka and AP). They were formed by periodically burning massive accumulations of cow dung in cattle pens.","explanation_hi":"राख के टीले (Ash mounds) दक्षिण भारतीय नवपाषाण संस्कृति की एक विशिष्ट विशेषता हैं (कर्नाटक और आंध्र प्रदेश में उतनूर, कुपगल, पिक्लीहल और मास्की जैसे स्थलों पर पाए जाते हैं)। ये मवेशियों के बाड़ों में बड़ी मात्रा में जमा हुए गोबर को समय-समय पर जलाने से बनते थे।"},"23":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Mehrgarh (located in the Bolan Pass, Balochistan) dates back to around 7000 BCE. It is famously known as the 'breadbasket of Balochistan' due to early wheat and barley cultivation, and features well-planned mud-brick houses.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। मेहरगढ़ (बोलन दर्रे, बलूचिस्तान में स्थित) लगभग 7000 ईसा पूर्व का है। इसे प्रारंभिक गेहूं और जौ की खेती के कारण 'बलूचिस्तान की रोटी की टोकरी' के रूप में जाना जाता है, और यहाँ अच्छी तरह से नियोजित कच्ची ईंटों के घर हैं।"},"24":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Chirand (Bihar) is famous for bone tools made from deer antlers. Koldihwa (Belan Valley) shows very early evidence of rice. Burzahom (J&K) is known for pit dwellings. Daojali Hading (Assam) yielded jadeite stones and cord-marked pottery.","explanation_hi":"चिरांद (बिहार) हिरण के सींगों से बने हड्डी के उपकरणों के लिए प्रसिद्ध है। कोल्डीहवा (बेलन घाटी) चावल के बहुत शुरुआती साक्ष्य दिखाता है। बुर्जहोम (J&K) गर्त-आवासों के लिए जाना जाता है। दाओजाली हाडिंग (असम) से जेडाइट पत्थर और डोरी-चिह्नित मिट्टी के बर्तन मिले हैं।"},"25":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Assertion (A) is correct as pottery making emerged strongly during the Neolithic age. Reason (R) perfectly explains it, because unlike hunter-gatherers, settled agriculturists required durable vessels to store surplus grains and cook their newly domesticated cereals.","explanation_hi":"कथन (A) सही है क्योंकि नवपाषाण युग के दौरान मिट्टी के बर्तन बनाने का कार्य मजबूती से उभरा। कारण (R) इसकी पूरी तरह से व्याख्या करता है, क्योंकि शिकारी-संग्राहकों के विपरीत, बसने वाले कृषकों को अधिशेष अनाज को स्टोर करने और अपने नए उगाए गए अनाज को पकाने के लिए टिकाऊ बर्तनों की आवश्यकता थी।"},"26":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The hallmark of Neolithic tool technology is grinding and polishing. While Paleolithic and Mesolithic tools were made by chipping and flaking, Neolithic humans ground and polished their stone axes (celts) to give them sharp, durable cutting edges for clearing vegetation.","explanation_hi":"नवपाषाण उपकरण तकनीक की पहचान घिसना और पॉलिश करना है। जबकि पुरापाषाण और मध्यपाषाण उपकरणों को छीलकर और शल्क बनाकर बनाया जाता था, नवपाषाण काल के इंसानों ने अपनी पत्थर की कुल्हाड़ियों (celts) को घिसकर और पॉलिश करके वनस्पति साफ करने के लिए तेज और टिकाऊ धार दी।"},"27":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Chirand in Bihar is highly notable in the Neolithic phase for its exceptionally rich yield of bone tools. In South India, the earliest farmers relied heavily on millets like ragi and pulses like horsegram rather than wheat or rice.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। बिहार का चिरांद नवपाषाण चरण में हड्डी के उपकरणों की असाधारण रूप से समृद्ध प्राप्ति के लिए अत्यधिक उल्लेखनीय है। दक्षिण भारत में, सबसे शुरुआती किसान गेहूं या चावल के बजाय रागी जैसे बाजरा और कुल्थी जैसी दालों पर बहुत अधिक निर्भर थे।"},"28":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"The fourth statement is definitively NOT correct. The Neolithic period is a purely Stone Age culture; the knowledge of metals, including iron, was completely absent. Iron was introduced much later, around 1000 BCE (Later Vedic / Megalithic period).","explanation_hi":"चौथा कथन निश्चित रूप से सही नहीं है। नवपाषाण काल विशुद्ध रूप से पाषाण युग की संस्कृति है; लोहे सहित धातुओं का ज्ञान पूरी तरह से अनुपस्थित था। लोहे की शुरुआत बहुत बाद में, लगभग 1000 ईसा पूर्व (उत्तर वैदिक / महापाषाण काल) में हुई थी।"},"29":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Gufkral (meaning 'cave of the potter') is in Jammu & Kashmir. Chirand is in Bihar. Piklihal is a famous ash mound and habitation site in Karnataka. Daojali Hading is located in the Dima Hasao district of Assam.","explanation_hi":"गुफकराल (जिसका अर्थ है 'कुम्हार की गुफा') जम्मू और कश्मीर में है। चिरांद बिहार में है। पिक्लीहल कर्नाटक में एक प्रसिद्ध राख का टीला और आवास स्थल है। दाओजाली हाडिंग असम के दीमा हसाओ जिले में स्थित है।"},"30":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Geographically from West to East: Mehrgarh is the westernmost (Balochistan, Pakistan), followed by Burzahom (Jammu & Kashmir), then Chirand (Bihar in the eastern Gangetic plain), and finally Daojali Hading (Assam) being the easternmost site.","explanation_hi":"भौगोलिक रूप से पश्चिम से पूर्व की ओर: मेहरगढ़ सबसे पश्चिमी (बलूचिस्तान, पाकिस्तान) है, इसके बाद बुर्जहोम (जम्मू और कश्मीर), फिर चिरांद (पूर्वी गंगा के मैदान में बिहार), और अंत में दाओजाली हाडिंग (असम) सबसे पूर्वी स्थल है।"}}