{"186":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Unlike the other three Vedas which focus on gods and elaborate sacrifices, the Atharva Veda reflects the everyday life, beliefs, and superstitions of common people, containing spells to ward off evil and diseases.","explanation_hi":"अन्य तीन वेदों के विपरीत, जो देवताओं और विस्तृत यज्ञों पर ध्यान केंद्रित करते हैं, अथर्ववेद आम लोगों के दैनिक जीवन, विश्वासों और अंधविश्वासों को दर्शाता है, जिसमें बुराई और बीमारियों को दूर करने के मंत्र शामिल हैं।"},"187":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Aitareya and Kaushitaki belong to the Rig Veda; Panchavimsha (and Jaiminiya) to the Sama Veda; Shatapatha (the largest) to the Yajur Veda; and Gopatha is the only Brahmana of the Atharva Veda.","explanation_hi":"ऐतरेय और कौषीतकि ऋग्वेद के हैं; पंचविंश (और जैमिनीय) सामवेद के; शतपथ (सबसे बड़ा) यजुर्वेद का; और गोपथ अथर्ववेद का एकमात्र ब्राह्मण ग्रंथ है।"},"188":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 2 is incorrect because 'Nirukta' (by Yaska) deals with etymology (origin of words). The Vedanga dealing with phonetics and pronunciation is 'Shiksha'. Statements 1 and 3 are correct descriptions.","explanation_hi":"कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि 'निरुक्त' (यास्क द्वारा रचित) व्युत्पत्ति (शब्दों की उत्पत्ति) से संबंधित है। स्वर विज्ञान और उच्चारण से संबंधित वेदांग 'शिक्षा' है। कथन 1 और 3 सही वर्णन हैं।"},"189":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The assertion is true, and the reason provides the exact definition. 'Vedanta' literally translates to 'the end of the Vedas', as they are placed at the end of the Vedic literature chronologically and philosophically.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है, और कारण सटीक परिभाषा प्रदान करता है। 'वेदांत' का शाब्दिक अर्थ 'वेदों का अंत' है, क्योंकि उन्हें कालानुक्रमिक और दार्शनिक रूप से वैदिक साहित्य के अंत में रखा गया है।"},"190":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Statement C is incorrect. The Sama Veda (not Yajur Veda) is considered the root of Indian classical music and dance, as it contains rhythmic chants and melodies. The Yajur Veda is focused on sacrificial rituals.","explanation_hi":"कथन C गलत है। सामवेद (न कि यजुर्वेद) को भारतीय शास्त्रीय संगीत और नृत्य का मूल माना जाता है, क्योंकि इसमें लयबद्ध मंत्र और धुनें हैं। यजुर्वेद यज्ञ अनुष्ठानों पर केंद्रित है।"},"191":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The phrase 'Satyameva Jayate' is a mantra from the ancient Mundaka Upanishad (Part 3, Section 1, Mantra 6). It emphasizes that truth ultimately prevails, not falsehood.","explanation_hi":"'सत्यमेव जयते' वाक्यांश प्राचीन मुंडक उपनिषद (भाग 3, खंड 1, मंत्र 6) का एक मंत्र है। यह इस बात पर जोर देता है कि अंततः सत्य की ही जीत होती है, झूठ की नहीं।"},"192":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"According to traditional classification (Charanavyuha), Ayurveda is the Upaveda of Rig Veda; Gandharvaveda belongs to Sama Veda; Dhanurveda to Yajur Veda; and Shilpaveda (or Sthapatyaveda) belongs to Atharva Veda.","explanation_hi":"पारंपरिक वर्गीकरण (चरणव्यूह) के अनुसार, आयुर्वेद ऋग्वेद का उपवेद है; गंधर्ववेद सामवेद का है; धनुर्वेद यजुर्वेद का है; और शिल्पवेद (या स्थापत्यवेद) अथर्ववेद का है।"},"193":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The Aranyakas (from 'Aranya' meaning forest) were concluding portions of the Brahmanas. They opposed excessive ritualism and initiated the philosophical thinking that fully bloomed in the Upanishads.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। आरण्यक ('अरण्य' का अर्थ है जंगल) ब्राह्मण ग्रंथों के अंतिम भाग थे। उन्होंने अत्यधिक कर्मकांड का विरोध किया और दार्शनिक सोच की शुरुआत की जो उपनिषदों में पूरी तरह से विकसित हुई।"},"194":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (part of the Shukla Yajur Veda) is the largest and oldest Upanishad. The Yajnavalkya-Maitreyi dialogue explores the nature of the Atman (Self) and eternal spiritual truth over material wealth.","explanation_hi":"बृहदारण्यकोपनिषद (शुक्ल यजुर्वेद का हिस्सा) सबसे बड़ा और सबसे पुराना उपनिषद है। याज्ञवल्क्य-मैत्रेयी संवाद भौतिक संपदा के ऊपर आत्मा के स्वरूप और शाश्वत आध्यात्मिक सत्य की पड़ताल करता है।"},"195":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All three statements are completely correct. Together, the Shrauta (public rituals), Grihya (domestic rituals), and Sulba (altar geometry) Sutras comprise the Kalpa Vedanga, ensuring proper execution of Vedic traditions.","explanation_hi":"तीनों कथन पूरी तरह से सही हैं। एक साथ, श्रौत (सार्वजनिक अनुष्ठान), गृह्य (घरेलू अनुष्ठान), और शुल्ब (वेदी ज्यामिति) सूत्र, कल्प वेदांग बनाते हैं, जो वैदिक परंपराओं का उचित निष्पादन सुनिश्चित करते हैं।"}}