{"146":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In the pastoral economy of the Early Vedic period, cows were the most important form of wealth. Wars were primarily fought for cattle, and the term for war, 'Gavisthi', literally means 'the search for cows'.","explanation_hi":"पूर्व वैदिक काल की पशुपालन अर्थव्यवस्था में, गायें धन का सबसे महत्वपूर्ण रूप थीं। युद्ध मुख्य रूप से मवेशियों के लिए लड़े जाते थे, और युद्ध के लिए प्रयुक्त शब्द, 'गविष्टि', का शाब्दिक अर्थ 'गायों की खोज' है।"},"147":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In the Rig Veda, Parushni corresponds to the modern Ravi, Asikni to Chenab, Vitasta to Jhelum, and Sutudri to Sutlej. The famous Battle of Ten Kings was fought on the banks of Parushni.","explanation_hi":"ऋग्वेद में, परुष्णी आधुनिक रावी, अस्किनी चिनाब, वितस्ता झेलम और शतद्रु सतलुज से मेल खाती है। प्रसिद्ध दसराज्ञ युद्ध परुष्णी के तट पर लड़ा गया था।"},"148":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 3 are correct. The Early Vedic society was relatively egalitarian. Women attended assemblies and composed hymns. Statement 2 is entirely incorrect; child marriage and Sati were absent in the Early Vedic period.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 3 सही हैं। पूर्व वैदिक समाज अपेक्षाकृत समतावादी था। महिलाओं ने सभाओं में भाग लिया और भजनों की रचना की। कथन 2 पूरी तरह से गलत है; पूर्व वैदिक काल में बाल विवाह और सती प्रथा अनुपस्थित थी।"},"149":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In the Rig Vedic period, 'Nishka' was initially a gold necklace or neck ornament worn by both men and women. Because of its fixed value and purity, it later evolved into a precursor to coinage or a medium of exchange.","explanation_hi":"ऋग्वैदिक काल में, 'निष्क' शुरू में पुरुषों और महिलाओं दोनों द्वारा पहना जाने वाला सोने का हार या गले का आभूषण था। इसके निश्चित मूल्य और शुद्धता के कारण, यह बाद में सिक्के या विनिमय के माध्यम के अग्रदूत के रूप में विकसित हुआ।"},"150":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The assertion is true. The king relied on tribal militias (militia groups like Gana, Vrata, Sardha) during wartime. The reason correctly explains that the lack of regular taxation and agricultural surplus made a standing army impossible.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है। युद्ध के समय राजा आदिवासी मिलिशिया (गण, व्रात, शर्ध जैसे समूह) पर निर्भर रहता था। कारण सही ढंग से बताता है कि नियमित कराधान और कृषि अधिशेष की कमी ने एक स्थायी सेना को असंभव बना दिया।"},"151":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In the Rigvedic administration, the Purohita was the chief priest/advisor; Senani was the head of the army; Vrajapati controlled the pasture grounds (crucial for a pastoral economy); and Spasas acted as spies.","explanation_hi":"ऋग्वैदिक प्रशासन में, पुरोहित मुख्य पुजारी/सलाहकार था; सेनानी सेना का प्रमुख था; व्राजपति चरागाह मैदानों (पशुपालन अर्थव्यवस्था के लिए महत्वपूर्ण) को नियंत्रित करता था; और स्पश जासूस के रूप में कार्य करते थे।"},"152":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The statement about 'Bali' is incorrect. In the Early Vedic period, 'Bali' was a voluntary offering or gift made by the tribesmen to the Rajan, not a compulsory or fixed land tax. It became a forced tax only in the Later Vedic period.","explanation_hi":"'बलि' के बारे में कथन गलत है। पूर्व वैदिक काल में, 'बलि' आदिवासियों द्वारा राजन को दिया जाने वाला एक स्वैच्छिक प्रसाद या उपहार था, न कि कोई अनिवार्य या निश्चित भूमि कर। यह केवल उत्तर वैदिक काल में एक अनिवार्य कर बना।"},"153":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 1 is completely false; early Vedic society was egalitarian and occupation-based, not rigidly birth-based. Statements 2 and 3 are correct. The Purusha Sukta (10th Mandala) is a late interpolation, showing the nascent stage of the four-fold system.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 पूरी तरह से गलत है; पूर्व वैदिक समाज समतावादी और व्यवसाय-आधारित था, जन्म-आधारित रूप से कठोर नहीं था। कथन 2 और 3 सही हैं। पुरुष सूक्त (10वां मंडल) बाद में जोड़ा गया है, जो चार-स्तरीय प्रणाली के प्रारंभिक चरण को दर्शाता है।"},"154":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Dasarajna war resulted from a rivalry between priests. King Sudas of the Bharata tribe dismissed Vishwamitra and appointed Vasishtha as his chief priest. Enraged, Vishwamitra organized a confederacy of ten kings against Sudas, but Sudas emerged victorious.","explanation_hi":"दसराज्ञ युद्ध पुजारियों के बीच प्रतिद्वंद्विता का परिणाम था। भरत जनजाति के राजा सुदास ने विश्वामित्र को हटाकर वशिष्ठ को अपना मुख्य पुरोहित नियुक्त किया। क्रोधित होकर, विश्वामित्र ने सुदास के खिलाफ दस राजाओं का एक संघ बनाया, लेकिन सुदास विजयी हुए।"},"155":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect because the Early Vedic Aryans did NOT know iron. They used copper/bronze (referred to as 'Ayas'). Iron (Shyama Ayas/Krishna Ayas) was discovered and used only in the Later Vedic period.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि पूर्व वैदिक आर्य लोहे को नहीं जानते थे। उन्होंने तांबे/कांस्य (जिसे 'अयस' कहा जाता था) का इस्तेमाल किया। लोहे (श्याम अयस/कृष्ण अयस) की खोज और उपयोग केवल उत्तर वैदिक काल में किया गया था।"},"156":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The basic unit of society was the family (Kula) headed by the Kulapa. A group of families formed a village (Grama) headed by a Gramini. A group of villages formed a clan (Vis) headed by a Vispati. A group of clans formed the tribe (Jana) headed by the Rajan.","explanation_hi":"समाज की मूल इकाई परिवार (कुल) थी जिसका मुखिया कुलपा होता था। परिवारों के एक समूह ने ग्रामणी के नेतृत्व में एक गाँव (ग्राम) बनाया। गाँवों के एक समूह ने विश्पति के नेतृत्व में एक विश (कबीला) बनाया। विशों के एक समूह ने राजन के नेतृत्व में जन (जनजाति) का निर्माण किया।"},"157":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The assertion is true; 'Aghanya' translates to 'not to be killed'. The reason is also correct and accurately explains that due to the extreme economic dependence on pastoralism and cattle-wealth, the cow attained a sacred, protected status.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है; 'अघन्या' का अर्थ है 'न मारा जाने योग्य'। कारण भी सही है और सटीक रूप से बताता है कि पशुचारण और मवेशियों के धन पर अत्यधिक आर्थिक निर्भरता के कारण, गाय ने एक पवित्र, संरक्षित दर्जा प्राप्त कर लिया था।"},"158":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect. The most frequently mentioned river in the Rig Veda is the Sindhu (Indus). The Saraswati, however, was considered the most pious/sacred river and is referred to as 'Naditarna' (best of rivers).","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है। ऋग्वेद में सबसे अधिक बार उल्लेखित नदी सिंधु है। सरस्वती, हालांकि, सबसे पवित्र नदी मानी जाती थी और इसे 'नदीतमा' (नदियों में सर्वश्रेष्ठ) कहा जाता था।"},"159":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In Vedic vocabulary, 'Panis' were traders who often hid stolen cattle; 'Duhitri' literally means 'one who milks the cow', showing cattle's importance; 'Vapta' was the barber; and 'Takshan' was the carpenter, a highly respected profession for making chariots.","explanation_hi":"वैदिक शब्दावली में, 'पणि' वे व्यापारी थे जो अक्सर चोरी के मवेशियों को छिपाते थे; 'द्युहित्री' का शाब्दिक अर्थ 'गाय दुहने वाली' है; 'वप्ता' नाई था; और 'तक्षण' बढ़ई था, जो रथ बनाने के कारण अत्यधिक सम्मानित पेशा था।"},"160":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Pushan was worshipped in the Rigvedic period as the protector of cattle, pathways, and journeys. By the Later Vedic period, as society rigidly stratified, Pushan's status was modified and he became associated as the patron deity of the Shudras.","explanation_hi":"पूषन की ऋग्वैदिक काल में मवेशियों, रास्तों और यात्राओं के रक्षक के रूप में पूजा की जाती थी। उत्तर वैदिक काल तक, जैसे-जैसे समाज कठोर रूप से स्तरीकृत हुआ, पूषन की स्थिति बदल गई और वे शूद्रों के प्रमुख देवता के रूप में जुड़ गए।"}}