{"871":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The ideals of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution were inspired by the French Revolution (1789-1799) and the French Constitution. The Russian Constitution inspired the ideal of Justice (social, economic, and political).","explanation_hi":"भारतीय संविधान की प्रस्तावना में स्वतंत्रता, समानता और बंधुत्व के आदर्श फ्रांसीसी क्रांति (1789-1799) और फ्रांसीसी संविधान से प्रेरित थे। रूसी संविधान ने न्याय (सामाजिक, आर्थिक और राजनीतिक) के आदर्श को प्रेरित किया।"},"872":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The word 'Sovereign' implies that India is an independent state. There is no authority above it, and it is free to conduct its own affairs (both internal and external). 'Republic' means the head of state is elected.","explanation_hi":"'संप्रभु' शब्द का अर्थ है कि भारत एक स्वतंत्र राज्य है। इसके ऊपर कोई अधिकार नहीं है, और यह अपने स्वयं के मामलों (आंतरिक और बाहरी दोनों) का संचालन करने के लिए स्वतंत्र है। 'गणराज्य' का अर्थ है कि राज्य का प्रमुख निर्वाचित होता है।"},"873":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Indian Constitution provides for representative parliamentary democracy under which the executive is responsible to the legislature for all its policies and actions. Universal adult franchise, periodic elections, rule of law, etc., are its manifestations.","explanation_hi":"भारतीय संविधान प्रतिनिधि संसदीय लोकतंत्र का प्रावधान करता है जिसके तहत कार्यपालिका अपनी सभी नीतियों और कार्यों के लिए विधायिका के प्रति जवाबदेह होती है। सार्वभौमिक वयस्क मताधिकार, आवधिक चुनाव, कानून का शासन आदि इसके स्वरूप हैं।"},"874":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"A democratic polity can be classified into a monarchy and a republic. In a republic, the head of the state is always elected directly or indirectly for a fixed period, e.g., the President of India.","explanation_hi":"एक लोकतांत्रिक राजव्यवस्था को राजशाही और गणराज्य में वर्गीकृत किया जा सकता है। एक गणराज्य में, राज्य का प्रमुख हमेशा एक निश्चित अवधि के लिए प्रत्यक्ष या अप्रत्यक्ष रूप से चुना जाता है, उदा., भारत के राष्ट्रपति।"},"875":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct. The Preamble secures to all citizens social, economic, and political justice. Statement 2 is incorrect because the ideal of justice was taken from the Russian Revolution (1917), not the French Revolution.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है। प्रस्तावना सभी नागरिकों को सामाजिक, आर्थिक और राजनीतिक न्याय सुरक्षित करती है। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि न्याय का आदर्श रूसी क्रांति (1917) से लिया गया था, न कि फ्रांसीसी क्रांति से।"},"876":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Preamble secures to all citizens of India equality of status and opportunity. This provision embraces three dimensions of equality—civic, political, and economic.","explanation_hi":"प्रस्तावना भारत के सभी नागरिकों को स्थिति और अवसर की समानता सुरक्षित करती है। यह प्रावधान समानता के तीन आयामों को समाहित करता है- नागरिक, राजनीतिक और आर्थिक।"},"877":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Sovereign means independent authority. Republic means the head of state is elected. Fraternity refers to a sense of brotherhood. Secular means the state treats all religions equally and is neutral.","explanation_hi":"संप्रभु का अर्थ है स्वतंत्र अधिकार। गणराज्य का अर्थ है कि राज्य का प्रमुख निर्वाचित होता है। बंधुत्व का अर्थ भाईचारे की भावना से है। धर्मनिरपेक्ष का अर्थ है कि राज्य सभी धर्मों के साथ समान व्यवहार करता है और तटस्थ है।"},"878":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Fraternity means a sense of brotherhood. The Constitution promotes this feeling through the system of single citizenship and Fundamental Duties (Article 51A). The Preamble declares that fraternity has to assure two things: the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation. Thus, R correctly explains A.","explanation_hi":"बंधुत्व का अर्थ है भाईचारे की भावना। संविधान एकल नागरिकता और मौलिक कर्तव्यों (अनुच्छेद 51A) की प्रणाली के माध्यम से इस भावना को बढ़ावा देता है। प्रस्तावना घोषणा करती है कि बंधुत्व को दो चीजें सुनिश्चित करनी हैं: व्यक्ति की गरिमा और राष्ट्र की एकता और अखंडता। इस प्रकार, R, A की सही व्याख्या करता है।"},"879":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Preamble mentions 'Justice, social, economic and political', not environmental justice. The other three options are exact phrases extracted verbatim from the text of the Preamble.","explanation_hi":"प्रस्तावना में 'न्याय, सामाजिक, आर्थिक और राजनीतिक' का उल्लेख है, न कि पर्यावरण न्याय का। अन्य तीन विकल्प प्रस्तावना के पाठ से शब्दशः निकाले गए सटीक वाक्यांश हैं।"},"880":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Preamble begins with the phrase 'We, the people of India', which establishes that the Constitution derives its authority from the people of India, not from any external body or specific institution.","explanation_hi":"प्रस्तावना 'हम, भारत के लोग' वाक्यांश से शुरू होती है, जो यह स्थापित करती है कि संविधान अपना अधिकार भारत के लोगों से प्राप्त करता है, न कि किसी बाहरी निकाय या विशिष्ट संस्थान से।"}}