{"41":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The term 'Chalcolithic' (Chalco = Copper, Lithic = Stone) refers to the Copper-Stone Age. It marks the transition period where humans first began using metal (copper) alongside microlithic stone tools, before the widespread adoption of bronze.","explanation_hi":"'ताम्रपाषाण' (Chalcolithic - कैल्को = तांबा, लिथिक = पत्थर) शब्द तांबा-पाषाण युग को संदर्भित करता है। यह उस संक्रमण काल को चिह्नित करता है जहां मनुष्यों ने पहली बार सूक्ष्म पाषाण उपकरणों के साथ धातु (तांबे) का उपयोग करना शुरू किया, जो कांसे के व्यापक उपयोग से पहले का समय था।"},"42":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; Chalcolithic cultures were predominantly rural. Statement 2 is incorrect because the Chalcolithic people generally used mud bricks or wattle and daub for houses. The use of burnt bricks is mostly absent, with rare exceptions like Gilund.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; ताम्रपाषाण संस्कृतियां मुख्य रूप से ग्रामीण थीं। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि ताम्रपाषाण काल के लोग आम तौर पर घरों के लिए कच्ची ईंटों या मिट्टी और लकड़ी/बांस (wattle and daub) का उपयोग करते थे। पकी हुई ईंटों का उपयोग लगभग नदारद है, गिलुंड जैसे कुछ दुर्लभ अपवादों को छोड़कर।"},"43":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Ahar-Banas culture flourished in Rajasthan (Mewar region). The Malwa culture (Navdatoli, Kayatha) was located in Madhya Pradesh. Both Jorwe and Savalda cultures were predominantly concentrated in Maharashtra (Deccan plateau).","explanation_hi":"आहार-बनास संस्कृति राजस्थान (मेवाड़ क्षेत्र) में फली-फूली। मालवा संस्कृति (नवदाटोली, कायथा) मध्य प्रदेश में स्थित थी। जोर्वे और सवालदा संस्कृतियां दोनों मुख्य रूप से महाराष्ट्र (दक्कन के पठार) में केंद्रित थीं।"},"44":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Ahar (located near Udaipur, Rajasthan) was anciently called Tambavati. Unlike other Chalcolithic sites that relied heavily on microliths, the people of Ahar predominantly used copper tools, exploiting the rich Khetri copper mines nearby.","explanation_hi":"आहार (उदयपुर, राजस्थान के पास स्थित) को प्राचीन काल में तांबवती कहा जाता था। माइक्रोलिथ्स पर बहुत अधिक निर्भर रहने वाले अन्य ताम्रपाषाण स्थलों के विपरीत, आहार के लोग मुख्य रूप से तांबे के औजारों का उपयोग करते थे, जो पास की समृद्ध खेतड़ी तांबे की खदानों का दोहन करते थे।"},"45":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Both statements are factually true. In the Jorwe culture of Maharashtra, urn burials under house floors in a North-South position were standard. Grave goods indicate a belief in the afterlife. However, Reason (R) does not explain WHY the burial was North-South or under the floor.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन तथ्यात्मक रूप से सत्य हैं। महाराष्ट्र की जोर्वे संस्कृति में, उत्तर-दक्षिण स्थिति में घर के फर्श के नीचे कलश शवाधान मानक था। कब्र में रखी वस्तुएं मृत्यु के बाद के जीवन में विश्वास का संकेत देती हैं। हालाँकि, कारण (R) यह नहीं बताता है कि शवाधान उत्तर-दक्षिण दिशा में या फर्श के नीचे क्यों था।"},"46":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Navdatoli (MP) on the Narmada river is famous for yielding diverse crops (wheat, rice, pulses). Inamgaon (Maharashtra) shows clear social stratification with a heavily fortified mud wall, a ditch, and a large multi-roomed chief's house.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। नर्मदा नदी पर स्थित नवदाटोली (मध्य प्रदेश) विविध फसलों (गेहूं, चावल, दालें) की प्राप्ति के लिए प्रसिद्ध है। इनामगांव (महाराष्ट्र) स्पष्ट सामाजिक स्तरीकरण को दर्शाता है, जिसमें एक मजबूत मिट्टी की दीवार, एक खाई और एक सरदार का कई कमरों वाला बड़ा घर है।"},"47":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The third statement is completely incorrect. The Chalcolithic period predates the Iron Age; these people had NO knowledge of iron. Iron technology appeared much later (around 1000 BCE). They used stone hoes and digging sticks for agriculture, not iron ploughshares.","explanation_hi":"तीसरा कथन पूरी तरह से गलत है। ताम्रपाषाण काल लौह युग से पहले का है; इन लोगों को लोहे का कोई ज्ञान नहीं था। लौह तकनीक बहुत बाद में (लगभग 1000 ईसा पूर्व) दिखाई दी। वे कृषि के लिए पत्थर की कुदाल और खोदने वाली छड़ियों का इस्तेमाल करते थे, लोहे के फाल का नहीं।"},"48":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The OCP and Copper Hoard culture (c. 2000-1500 BCE) is distinctly concentrated in the Ganga-Yamuna Doab region (western Uttar Pradesh). Sites like Saipai and Atranjikhera have yielded heavy copper implements (harpoons, antennae swords) alongside OCP.","explanation_hi":"ओसीपी और ताम्र संचय संस्कृति (लगभग 2000-1500 ईसा पूर्व) स्पष्ट रूप से गंगा-यमुना दोआब क्षेत्र (पश्चिमी उत्तर प्रदेश) में केंद्रित है। सैपई और अतरंजीखेड़ा जैसे स्थलों से ओसीपी के साथ भारी तांबे के उपकरण (हार्पून, एंटीना तलवारें) मिले हैं।"},"49":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The Jorwe culture (c. 1400-700 BCE) was the most extensive Chalcolithic culture in Maharashtra. Daimabad, the largest Jorwe site on the Pravara river, yielded the spectacular hoard of four heavy bronze objects including the famous chariot.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। जोर्वे संस्कृति (लगभग 1400-700 ईसा पूर्व) महाराष्ट्र में सबसे व्यापक ताम्रपाषाण संस्कृति थी। प्रवरा नदी पर स्थित सबसे बड़े जोर्वे स्थल दायमाबाद से, प्रसिद्ध रथ सहित चार भारी कांस्य वस्तुओं का शानदार खजाना मिला है।"},"50":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Most Chalcolithic cultures in Central and Western India declined around 1200 BCE, likely due to decreasing rainfall. However, the Jorwe culture in Maharashtra survived significantly longer, continuing in its late phase until approximately 700 BCE before the advent of the Megalithic Iron Age.","explanation_hi":"मध्य और पश्चिमी भारत में अधिकांश ताम्रपाषाण संस्कृतियों का पतन लगभग 1200 ईसा पूर्व में हो गया, जिसका संभावित कारण वर्षा में कमी थी। हालाँकि, महाराष्ट्र में जोर्वे संस्कृति काफी लंबे समय तक जीवित रही, और महापाषाण लौह युग के आगमन से पहले लगभग 700 ईसा पूर्व तक अपने अंतिम चरण में जारी रही।"}}