{"61":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"A remarkable feature of the Harappan civilization was the standardization of brick sizes. Whether sun-dried or baked, the bricks uniformly followed the ratio of 4:2:1 (length:breadth:height) across all settlements.","explanation_hi":"हड़प्पा सभ्यता की एक उल्लेखनीय विशेषता ईंटों के आकार का मानकीकरण था। चाहे धूप में सुखाई गई हों या पकी हुई, सभी बस्तियों में ईंटें समान रूप से 4:2:1 (लंबाई:चौड़ाई:ऊंचाई) के अनुपात में थीं।"},"62":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; the Citadel housed public buildings, while the Lower Town was residential. Statement 2 is incorrect; houses generally opened into narrow inner lanes to avoid dust and noise from the main streets, with Lothal being the only exception.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; गढ़ में सार्वजनिक इमारतें थीं, जबकि निचला शहर आवासीय था। कथन 2 गलत है; मुख्य सड़कों की धूल और शोर से बचने के लिए घर आमतौर पर संकरी आंतरिक गलियों में खुलते थे (लोथल इसका एकमात्र अपवाद था)।"},"63":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Dholavira, located in the Rann of Kutch (Gujarat), is unique among Harappan sites as it was divided into three distinct sections (Citadel, Middle Town, and Lower Town), each enclosed by its own massive stone walls.","explanation_hi":"कच्छ के रण (गुजरात) में स्थित धोलावीरा हड़प्पा स्थलों में अद्वितीय है क्योंकि इसे तीन अलग-अलग वर्गों (गढ़, मध्य नगर और निचला नगर) में विभाजित किया गया था, जिनमें से प्रत्येक अपनी विशाल पत्थर की दीवारों से घिरा हुआ था।"},"64":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Great Bath is in Mohenjodaro; early ploughed fields were found in Kalibangan; unique water harvesting reservoirs and a stadium were found in Dholavira; and Chanhudaro is the only major IVC city without a citadel.","explanation_hi":"विशाल स्नानागार मोहनजोदड़ो में है; कालीबंगन में जुते हुए खेत मिले; धोलावीरा में अद्वितीय जल संचयन जलाशय और एक स्टेडियम पाया गया; और चन्हुदड़ो एकमात्र प्रमुख सिंधु शहर है जिसमें कोई दुर्ग (गढ़) नहीं है।"},"65":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Harappan civilization's most striking feature was its drainage system. House drains connected to street drains, which were covered with bricks or stone slabs and had inspection traps (manholes), fully explaining the assertion.","explanation_hi":"हड़प्पा सभ्यता की सबसे खास विशेषता इसकी जल निकासी प्रणाली थी। घरों की नालियां सड़क की नालियों से जुड़ी थीं, जिन्हें ईंटों या पत्थर की सिल्लियों से ढका गया था और सफाई के लिए उनमें मैनहोल थे, जो इस दावे की पूरी तरह से व्याख्या करता है।"},"66":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Harappans belonged to the Bronze Age and had absolutely no knowledge of iron. They extensively used baked bricks, sun-dried bricks (like in Kalibangan), and stone (like in Dholavira).","explanation_hi":"हड़प्पावासी कांस्य युग के थे और उन्हें लोहे का बिल्कुल भी ज्ञान नहीं था। उन्होंने पकी हुई ईंटों, धूप में सुखाई गई ईंटों (जैसे कालीबंगन में) और पत्थर (जैसे धोलावीरा में) का बड़े पैमाने पर उपयोग किया।"},"67":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"To ensure the Great Bath held water without leaking, the floor and walls were built using finely fitted bricks, plastered with gypsum mortar, and made perfectly watertight by adding a layer of natural tar (bitumen).","explanation_hi":"विशाल स्नानागार में पानी बिना रिसाव के रुका रहे, इसके लिए फर्श और दीवारों को ईंटों से बनाया गया था, जिप्सम मोर्टार से प्लास्टर किया गया था, और प्राकृतिक डामर (बिटुमेन) की एक परत चढ़ाकर इसे पूरी तरह से जलरोधी बनाया गया था।"},"68":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All statements are correct. Harappa has 12 granaries in a 6x2 layout. Kalibangan is notable for poor civic standards using mud bricks for houses. Lothal is the sole exception where doors faced the main road.","explanation_hi":"सभी कथन सही हैं। हड़प्पा में 6x2 लेआउट में 12 अन्नागार हैं। कालीबंगन में घरों के लिए मिट्टी की ईंटों का उपयोग किया गया था। लोथल एकमात्र अपवाद है जहां घरों के दरवाजे मुख्य सड़क की ओर खुलते थे।"},"69":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The world's first known artificial dockyard was found in Lothal. A wooden signboard with 10 large Harappan signs was found in Dholavira. Kalibangan ('Black Bangles') yielded bangle factories, and Harappa had the 6-granary rows.","explanation_hi":"दुनिया का पहला ज्ञात कृत्रिम गोदीवाड़ा लोथल में पाया गया था। 10 बड़े चिह्नों वाला लकड़ी का साइनबोर्ड धोलावीरा में मिला था। कालीबंगन ('काली चूड़ियाँ') में चूड़ियों के कारखाने मिले, और हड़प्पा में छह-अन्नागारों की पंक्तियाँ थीं।"},"70":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Assertion (A) is true as the cities perfectly followed a grid system. Reason (R) is false because such high-level uniformity in streets, drainage, and brick ratios across vast distances implies a strong centralized administrative authority, not individual freedom.","explanation_hi":"दावा (A) सत्य है क्योंकि शहरों ने पूरी तरह से ग्रिड प्रणाली का पालन किया। कारण (R) असत्य है क्योंकि विशाल दूरियों में सड़कों, जल निकासी और ईंटों के अनुपात में इस तरह की उच्च-स्तरीय एकरूपता एक मजबूत केंद्रीकृत प्रशासनिक प्राधिकरण को दर्शाती है, न कि व्यक्तिगत स्वतंत्रता को।"}}