{"171":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"In the Later Vedic texts, iron is referred to as 'Shyama Ayas' or 'Krishna Ayas' (dark or black metal). Copper was referred to as 'Lohit Ayas' (red metal), and 'Hiranya' referred to gold.","explanation_hi":"उत्तर वैदिक ग्रंथों में, लोहे को 'श्याम अयस' या 'कृष्ण अयस' (गहरी या काली धातु) कहा गया है। तांबे को 'लोहित अयस' (लाल धातु) कहा जाता था, और 'हिरण्य' सोने को संदर्भित करता था।"},"172":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Territorial identity (Rashtra) emerged, and women lost their political rights. Statement 3 is incorrect because the Vidatha completely disappeared in the Later Vedic period, and the Sabha/Samiti were dominated by elites.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। क्षेत्रीय पहचान (राष्ट्र) का उदय हुआ, और महिलाओं ने अपने राजनीतिक अधिकार खो दिए। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि उत्तर वैदिक काल में 'विदथ' पूरी तरह से गायब हो गई थी, और सभा/समिति पर कुलीनों का दबदबा हो गया था।"},"173":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Rajasuya was the royal consecration ceremony; Ashvamedha was a horse sacrifice meant for imperial expansion and territorial claim; and Vajapeya was a chariot race where the king's chariot was deliberately made to win to show his superiority.","explanation_hi":"राजसूय शाही राज्याभिषेक समारोह था; अश्वमेध एक घोड़ा बलि थी जिसका अर्थ शाही विस्तार और क्षेत्रीय दावा था; और वाजपेय एक रथ दौड़ थी जहाँ राजा की श्रेष्ठता दिखाने के लिए राजा के रथ को जानबूझकर जिताया जाता था।"},"174":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Assertion is true as voluntary offerings (Bali) of the Early Vedic age became compulsory taxes. Reason is true and is the correct explanation, as only settled agriculture could provide the surplus grain required to sustain tax collectors and kings.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है क्योंकि पूर्व वैदिक युग के स्वैच्छिक प्रसाद (बलि) अनिवार्य कर बन गए। कारण सत्य है और सही व्याख्या है, क्योंकि केवल स्थायी कृषि ही कर संग्रहकर्ताओं और राजाओं को बनाए रखने के लिए आवश्यक अधिशेष अनाज प्रदान कर सकती थी।"},"175":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Bhagadugha, Sangrahitri, and Suta are correctly matched. Vrajapati was an Early Vedic officer in charge of pasture lands, not a Chief Justice. The judicial system in the Later Vedic period was mostly managed by the King directly.","explanation_hi":"भागदुघ, संग्रहित्री और सूत सही सुमेलित हैं। व्राजपति चरागाह भूमि का प्रभारी एक पूर्व वैदिक अधिकारी था, मुख्य न्यायाधीश नहीं। उत्तर वैदिक काल में न्यायिक प्रणाली का प्रबंधन ज्यादातर सीधे राजा द्वारा किया जाता था।"},"176":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. The rigid birth-based Varna and Gotra exogamy emerged now. Statement 3 is incorrect because the fourth Ashrama (Sanyasa) was not well-established in this period; it was added later (first mentioned clearly in the Jabala Upanishad).","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कठोर जन्म-आधारित वर्ण और गोत्र बहिर्विवाह अब उभरे। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि इस अवधि में चौथा आश्रम (संन्यास) अच्छी तरह से स्थापित नहीं था; इसे बाद में जोड़ा गया (पहली बार जाबाल उपनिषद में स्पष्ट रूप से उल्लेख किया गया है)।"},"177":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Indra and Agni, the two most important gods of the Rig Veda, lost their former glory in the Later Vedic period. Prajapati (the Creator, later Brahma) emerged as the supreme deity, followed by Rudra and Vishnu.","explanation_hi":"ऋग्वेद के दो सबसे महत्वपूर्ण देवताओं, इंद्र और अग्नि ने उत्तर वैदिक काल में अपना पूर्व गौरव खो दिया। प्रजापति (निर्माता, बाद में ब्रह्मा) सर्वोच्च देवता के रूप में उभरे, उसके बाद रुद्र और विष्णु का स्थान आया।"},"178":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Hotri recited hymns from the Rig Veda; the Udgatri sang melodies from the Sama Veda; the Adhvaryu performed rituals using the Yajur Veda; and the Brahman supervised the entire sacrifice, associated with the Atharva Veda.","explanation_hi":"होत्री ने ऋग्वेद के भजनों का पाठ किया; उद्गात्री ने सामवेद से धुनें गाईं; अध्वर्यु ने यजुर्वेद का उपयोग करके अनुष्ठान किए; और ब्रह्मन ने पूरे यज्ञ की देखरेख की, जो अथर्ववेद से जुड़े थे।"},"179":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Assertion is true; the core area shifted eastwards to western UP. Reason is true and explains the assertion perfectly. Iron tools (Shyama Ayas) were technologically necessary to clear the dense forests of the Doab for settlement.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है; मुख्य क्षेत्र पूर्व की ओर पश्चिमी यूपी में स्थानांतरित हो गया। कारण सत्य है और दावे की पूरी तरह से व्याख्या करता है। दोआब के घने जंगलों को बस्तियों के लिए साफ करने के लिए लोहे के औजार (श्याम अयस) तकनीकी रूप से आवश्यक थे।"},"180":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"In Later Vedic literature, 'Vrihi' refers to rice, which became a staple diet as Aryans moved to the water-rich Gangetic plains. 'Yava' meant barley, 'Godhuma' meant wheat, and 'Masha' referred to urad dal.","explanation_hi":"उत्तर वैदिक साहित्य में, 'व्रीहि' का अर्थ चावल है, जो पानी से समृद्ध गंगा के मैदानों में आर्यों के जाने के बाद मुख्य आहार बन गया। 'यव' का अर्थ जौ, 'गोधूम' का अर्थ गेहूं और 'माशा' का अर्थ उड़द दाल था।"},"181":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. The Shatapatha Brahmana heavily emphasizes agriculture. Statement 3 is incorrect because metallic coins (like Karshapana) were not widely established; trade was still largely barter-based, though 'Nishka' and 'Satamana' were used as units of value.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। शतपथ ब्राह्मण कृषि पर बहुत जोर देता है। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि धातु के सिक्के (जैसे कार्षापण) व्यापक रूप से स्थापित नहीं थे; व्यापार अभी भी काफी हद तक वस्तु विनिमय पर आधारित था, हालांकि 'निष्क' और 'शतमान' का उपयोग मूल्य की इकाइयों के रूप में किया जाता था।"},"182":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"The statement about idol worship is entirely incorrect. Even in the Later Vedic period, religion was based on chanting hymns and performing fire sacrifices (Yajnas). Idol worship and temple building were completely unknown during this phase.","explanation_hi":"मूर्ति पूजा के बारे में कथन पूरी तरह से गलत है। उत्तर वैदिक काल में भी, धर्म मंत्रोच्चारण और अग्नि यज्ञों (Yajnas) पर आधारित था। इस चरण के दौरान मूर्ति पूजा और मंदिर निर्माण पूरी तरह से अज्ञात थे।"},"183":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Mundaka Upanishad is famously the source of the Indian national motto 'Satyameva Jayate'. It is also highly critical of rituals, famously comparing sacrifices to 'leaky boats' that cannot lead one to true knowledge.","explanation_hi":"मुंडक उपनिषद भारतीय राष्ट्रीय आदर्श वाक्य 'सत्यमेव जयते' का प्रसिद्ध स्रोत है। यह कर्मकांडों का भी अत्यधिक आलोचक है, यज्ञों की तुलना 'टूटी हुई नावों' से करता है जो मनुष्य को सच्चे ज्ञान तक नहीं ले जा सकती हैं।"},"184":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The assertion is true; society divided strictly into 4 Varnas. The reason is also correct. The top two Varnas (Brahmanas and Kshatriyas) collected taxes and gifts, the Vaishyas produced agricultural surplus and paid taxes, and the Shudras served the upper three.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है; समाज सख्ती से 4 वर्णों में विभाजित हो गया। कारण भी सही है। शीर्ष दो वर्णों (ब्राह्मण और क्षत्रिय) ने कर और उपहार एकत्र किए, वैश्यों ने कृषि अधिशेष का उत्पादन किया और करों का भुगतान किया, और शूद्रों ने ऊपरी तीनों की सेवा की।"},"185":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Upanishads (meaning 'sitting down near' a teacher) form the concluding part of the Vedas (Vedanta). They represent a philosophical backlash against priestly dominance and bloody sacrifices, emphasizing spiritual knowledge, Atman, and Brahman.","explanation_hi":"उपनिषद (जिसका अर्थ है शिक्षक के 'समीप बैठना') वेदों (वेदांत) का अंतिम भाग बनाते हैं। वे पुरोहितों के प्रभुत्व और रक्तपात वाले यज्ञों के खिलाफ एक दार्शनिक प्रतिक्रिया का प्रतिनिधित्व करते हैं, जो आध्यात्मिक ज्ञान, आत्मा और ब्रह्म पर जोर देते हैं।"}}