{"556":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The royal emblem of the Cholas was the Tiger, the Cheras used the Bow and Arrow, and the Pandyas used the Carp/Fish as their dynastic symbol.","explanation_hi":"चोलों का शाही प्रतीक बाघ था, चेरों ने धनुष और बाण का इस्तेमाल किया, और पांड्यों ने कार्प/मछली को अपने वंशवादी प्रतीक के रूप में इस्तेमाल किया।"},"557":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Authored by Tolkappiyar, it is not only a foundational treatise on Tamil grammar (Ilakkanam) but also a vital source for understanding the socio-economic conditions of the Sangam era.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। तोल्काप्पियार द्वारा रचित, यह न केवल तमिल व्याकरण (इलक्कनम) पर एक मूलभूत ग्रंथ है, बल्कि संगम युग की सामाजिक-आर्थिक स्थितियों को समझने के लिए एक महत्वपूर्ण स्रोत भी है।"},"558":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Marutam is incorrectly matched. The chief deity of the Marutam (agricultural plains) was Indra. Varunan was the chief deity of the Neytal (coastal) region.","explanation_hi":"मरुतम गलत सुमेलित है। मरुतम (कृषि मैदान) के प्रमुख देवता इंद्र थे। वरुणन नेयदल (तटीय) क्षेत्र के प्रमुख देवता थे।"},"559":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both A and R are true, and R is the direct archaeological evidence (explanation/proof) that validates the assertion of flourishing Indo-Roman trade during the Sangam period.","explanation_hi":"A और R दोनों सत्य हैं, और R प्रत्यक्ष पुरातात्विक साक्ष्य (स्पष्टीकरण/प्रमाण) है जो संगम काल के दौरान फलते-फूलते भारत-रोमन व्यापार के दावे को मान्य करता है।"},"560":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 3 are correct. Statement 2 is incorrect because the Second Sangam was held at Kapatapuram (not Madurai) and was chaired by Agastya (and later Tolkappiyar). The Third Sangam was held at Madurai under Nakkirar.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 3 सही हैं। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि दूसरा संगम कपाटपुरम (मदुरै नहीं) में आयोजित किया गया था और इसकी अध्यक्षता अगस्त्य (और बाद में तोल्काप्पियार) ने की थी। तीसरा संगम नक्कीरर के अधीन मदुरै में आयोजित किया गया था।"},"561":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"'Silappatikaram' (The Tale of an Anklet) was written by Ilango Adigal, a Jain monk and the brother of the Chera king Senguttuvan. It is one of the Five Great Epics of Tamil literature.","explanation_hi":"'शिलप्पादिकारम' (एक पायल की कहानी) इलंगो अडिगल द्वारा लिखा गया था, जो एक जैन भिक्षु और चेर राजा सेनगुट्टुवन के भाई थे। यह तमिल साहित्य के पांच महान महाकाव्यों में से एक है।"},"562":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Pattini cult (worship of the Goddess of Chastity, Kannagi) was introduced by the Chera king Senguttuvan. According to tradition, he even led an expedition to the Himalayas to bring a stone for her idol.","explanation_hi":"पत्तिनी पंथ (सतीत्व की देवी, कण्णगी की पूजा) चेर राजा सेनगुट्टुवन द्वारा शुरू किया गया था। परंपरा के अनुसार, उन्होंने उनकी मूर्ति के लिए पत्थर लाने के लिए हिमालय तक एक अभियान का नेतृत्व भी किया था।"},"563":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Muziris, located on the Malabar Coast (western coast) in the Chera kingdom, was a prime port for the Indo-Roman spice trade, especially famous for exporting 'Yavanapriya' (pepper). Puhar, Korkai, and Arikamedu were on the eastern coast.","explanation_hi":"चेर राज्य में मालाबार तट (पश्चिमी तट) पर स्थित मुज़िरिस, भारत-रोमन मसाला व्यापार के लिए एक प्रमुख बंदरगाह था, जो विशेष रूप से 'यवनप्रिय' (काली मिर्च) के निर्यात के लिए प्रसिद्ध था। पुहार, कोरकई और अरिकामेडु पूर्वी तट पर थे।"},"564":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect because Manimekalai strongly advocates the philosophy of Buddhism, not Jainism (Silappatikaram has Jain leanings, but Manimekalai is a Buddhist epic).","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि मणिमेकलई जैन धर्म की नहीं, बल्कि बौद्ध धर्म के दर्शन की पुरजोर वकालत करता है (शिलप्पादिकारम का झुकाव जैन धर्म की ओर है, लेकिन मणिमेकलई एक बौद्ध महाकाव्य है)।"},"565":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Tirukkural (or Kural), authored by Thiruvalluvar, is a masterpiece of Tamil literature covering ethics, political/economic matters, and love. It is deeply revered and known as the Bible of Tamil Land.","explanation_hi":"तिरुवल्लुवर द्वारा रचित तिरुक्कुरल (या कुरल), नैतिकता, राजनीतिक/आर्थिक मामलों और प्रेम को कवर करने वाली तमिल साहित्य की एक उत्कृष्ट कृति है। यह बहुत पूजनीय है और इसे तमिल भूमि की बाइबिल के रूप में जाना जाता है।"},"566":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Karikala Chola won the famous Battle of Venni and built the Kallanai dam across the Kaveri. Nedunjeliyan (Pandya) decisively won the Battle of Talaiyalanganam. Senguttuvan (Chera) is famed for his Himalayan expedition to fetch stone for Kannagi's idol.","explanation_hi":"करिकाल चोल ने वेण्णि का प्रसिद्ध युद्ध जीता और कावेरी पर कल्लनई बांध का निर्माण किया। नेदुनजेलियन (पांड्य) ने निर्णायक रूप से तलैयालंगानम का युद्ध जीता। सेनगुट्टुवन (चेर) कण्णगी की मूर्ति के लिए पत्थर लाने के लिए अपने हिमालयी अभियान के लिए प्रसिद्ध है।"},"567":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Option 2 is incorrect. While women enjoyed considerable freedom and respect (as seen by female poets and love marriages), the practice of Sati (known as 'Tipaaydal') was prevalent, especially among the royal and warrior classes, though not universally forced.","explanation_hi":"विकल्प 2 गलत है। हालाँकि महिलाओं को काफी स्वतंत्रता और सम्मान प्राप्त था (जैसा कि महिला कवियों और प्रेम विवाहों से देखा जा सकता है), सती प्रथा ('तीपायडल' के रूप में जानी जाती थी) प्रचलित थी, विशेष रूप से शाही और योद्धा वर्गों के बीच, यद्यपि इसे सार्वभौमिक रूप से मजबूर नहीं किया गया था।"},"568":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"In Sangam poetry, 'Aham' (inner) focuses on personal emotions, love, and family life. 'Puram' (outer) deals with public life, heroism, war, kingship, and ethics.","explanation_hi":"संगम कविता में, 'अகம்' (आंतरिक) व्यक्तिगत भावनाओं, प्रेम और पारिवारिक जीवन पर केंद्रित है। 'पुरम' (बाहरी) सार्वजनिक जीवन, वीरता, युद्ध, राजत्व और नैतिकता से संबंधित है।"},"569":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"During the Sangam Age, the society was divided based on occupation. The 'Vellalars' were the wealthy agriculturalists and landowners who formed a dominant and highly respected class in the society.","explanation_hi":"संगम काल के दौरान, समाज को व्यवसाय के आधार पर विभाजित किया गया था। 'वेल्लालर' धनी कृषक और जमींदार थे जो समाज में एक प्रमुख और अत्यधिक सम्मानित वर्ग बनाते थे।"},"570":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Murugan (also known as Seyon) was the primary and most revered deity of the Sangam Tamils. He was celebrated as the god of war, youth, and beauty, and was the presiding deity of the Kurinji (mountainous) landscape.","explanation_hi":"मुरुगन (जिन्हें सेयोन के नाम से भी जाना जाता है) संगम तमिलों के प्राथमिक और सबसे श्रद्धेय देवता थे। उन्हें युद्ध, यौवन और सुंदरता के देवता के रूप में मनाया जाता था, और वे कुरुंजी (पहाड़ी) परिदृश्य के पीठासीन देवता थे।"}}