{"546":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Hiuen Tsang's travelogue is named 'Si-Yu-Ki' (Buddhist Records of the Western World). 'Fo-Kwo-Ki' was written by Fa-Hien, another prominent Chinese pilgrim who visited earlier during the Gupta period.","explanation_hi":"ह्वेनसांग के यात्रा वृत्तांत का नाम 'सी-यू-की' (पश्चिमी दुनिया के बौद्ध रिकॉर्ड) है। 'फो-क्वो-की' फाह्यान द्वारा लिखा गया था, जो एक अन्य प्रमुख चीनी यात्री थे जिन्होंने पहले गुप्त काल के दौरान यात्रा की थी।"},"547":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"When Hiuen Tsang visited and studied at Nalanda, the institution was under the guidance of the venerable Buddhist scholar Shilabhadra, whom Hiuen Tsang highly respected as his teacher.","explanation_hi":"जब ह्वेनसांग ने नालंदा का दौरा किया और अध्ययन किया, तो यह संस्था श्रद्धेय बौद्ध विद्वान शीलभद्र के मार्गदर्शन में थी, जिन्हें ह्वेनसांग ने अपने शिक्षक के रूप में बहुत सम्मान दिया।"},"548":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Hiuen Tsang is the first major historical source to explicitly classify Shudras as agriculturists (Krishivala). He also corroborated Fa-Hien's earlier observations about the harsh untouchability practices.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। ह्वेनसांग शूद्रों को स्पष्ट रूप से कृषक (कृषीवल) के रूप में वर्गीकृत करने वाले पहले प्रमुख ऐतिहासिक स्रोत हैं। उन्होंने कठोर अस्पृश्यता प्रथाओं के बारे में फाह्यान के पहले के अवलोकनों की भी पुष्टि की।"},"549":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both statements are true and R perfectly explains A. Hiuen Tsang traveled to 'Mo-ho-la-cha' (Maharashtra) and was highly impressed by the brave and martial nature of Pulakeshin II's subjects and army.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सत्य हैं और R, A की पूरी तरह से व्याख्या करता है। ह्वेनसांग ने 'मो-हो-ला-चा' (महाराष्ट्र) की यात्रा की और पुलकेशिन द्वितीय की प्रजा और सेना की बहादुर और लड़ाकू प्रकृति से बहुत प्रभावित हुआ।"},"550":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Hiuen Tsang vividly described the desolation of Pataliputra, the former capital of the Mauryas and Guptas. He noted that the center of political power in North India had entirely shifted to Kannauj under Harsha.","explanation_hi":"ह्वेनसांग ने मौर्यों और गुप्तों की पूर्व राजधानी पाटलिपुत्र के उजाड़ होने का विशद वर्णन किया है। उन्होंने उल्लेख किया कि उत्तर भारत में राजनीतिक शक्ति का केंद्र पूरी तरह से हर्ष के अधीन कन्नौज में स्थानांतरित हो गया था।"},"551":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are true. Hiuen Tsang noted that while physical punishments (mutilation of nose/hands) were severe for moral offenses, the death penalty was generally absent. Treason led to banishment or life in a dungeon. Divine ordeals were very common.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सत्य हैं। ह्वेनसांग ने उल्लेख किया कि यद्यपि नैतिक अपराधों के लिए शारीरिक दंड (नाक/हाथ काटना) गंभीर थे, मृत्युदंड आम तौर पर अनुपस्थित था। देशद्रोह के कारण निर्वासन या काल कोठरी में आजीवन कारावास होता था। दैवीय परीक्षण (अग्निपरीक्षा आदि) बहुत आम थे।"},"552":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 1 is incorrect because Hiuen Tsang lamented that Buddhism was in a state of rapid decline in its original homeland (like Kapilavastu and Kushinagar). Statement 2 is correct; he personally witnessed the massive Hindu congregation at Prayag.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 गलत है क्योंकि ह्वेनसांग ने विलाप किया कि बौद्ध धर्म अपनी मूल मातृभूमि (जैसे कपिलवस्तु और कुशीनगर) में तेजी से पतन की स्थिति में था। कथन 2 सही है; उसने व्यक्तिगत रूप से प्रयाग में विशाल हिंदू मण्डली (सभा) को देखा था।"},"553":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Impressed by his profound knowledge and mastery over Buddhist philosophy, the Mahayana monks at Nalanda Mahavihara bestowed upon Hiuen Tsang the revered title of 'Mokshadeva' (the deity of liberation).","explanation_hi":"उनके गहन ज्ञान और बौद्ध दर्शन पर महारत से प्रभावित होकर, नालंदा महाविहार में महायान भिक्षुओं ने ह्वेनसांग को 'मोक्षदेव' (मुक्ति के देवता) की श्रद्धेय उपाधि से सम्मानित किया।"},"554":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Hiuen Tsang's itinerary covered major powers: He stayed with Harsha in Kannauj, visited his ally Bhaskaravarman in Kamarupa, went south to Kanchipuram (Pallavas) under Narasimhavarman I, and visited the Chalukya court of Pulakeshin II at Badami.","explanation_hi":"ह्वेनसांग के यात्रा कार्यक्रम में प्रमुख शक्तियां शामिल थीं: वह कन्नौज में हर्ष के साथ रहा, कामरूप में उसके सहयोगी भास्करवर्मन से मिला, दक्षिण में नरसिंहवर्मन प्रथम के अधीन कांचीपुरम (पल्लव) गया, और बादामी में पुलकेशिन द्वितीय के चालुक्य दरबार का दौरा किया।"},"555":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Xuanzang (Hiuen Tsang) undertook his perilous journey primarily as a devout pilgrim and scholar. His goal was to visit the sacred sites associated with the Buddha and to acquire original Buddhist texts to resolve doctrinal disputes in China.","explanation_hi":"जुआनज़ांग (ह्वेनसांग) ने अपनी खतरनाक यात्रा मुख्य रूप से एक धर्मनिष्ठ तीर्थयात्री और विद्वान के रूप में की थी। उनका लक्ष्य बुद्ध से जुड़े पवित्र स्थलों की यात्रा करना और चीन में सैद्धांतिक विवादों को सुलझाने के लिए मूल बौद्ध ग्रंथों को प्राप्त करना था।"}}