{"96":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The 'Unicorn' (a mythical one-horned creature) is the most commonly represented animal on Harappan seals, followed by the humped bull. Animals like the cow, horse, and lion were not depicted on these seals.","explanation_hi":"हड़प्पा की मुहरों पर सबसे अधिक दर्शाया जाने वाला जानवर 'यूनिकॉर्न' (एक पौराणिक एक सींग वाला प्राणी) है, जिसके बाद कुबड़ वाला बैल आता है। गाय, घोड़े और शेर जैसे जानवरों को इन मुहरों पर नहीं दर्शाया गया था।"},"97":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 3 are correct. Statement 2 is incorrect because a striking and unique feature of the Indus Valley Civilization is the complete absence of any recognizable temples or monumental religious structures.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 3 सही हैं। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि सिंधु घाटी सभ्यता की एक खास और अनूठी विशेषता किसी भी पहचानने योग्य मंदिर या स्मारकीय धार्मिक संरचनाओं का पूरी तरह से अभाव है।"},"98":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Dancing Girl (Mohenjodaro) is bronze; the bearded Priest King (Mohenjodaro) is carved from steatite (soapstone); the anatomical Male Torso (Harappa) is red sandstone; and common toys were made of baked clay (terracotta).","explanation_hi":"नर्तकी (मोहनजोदड़ो) कांस्य की है; दाढ़ी वाले पुरोहित राजा (मोहनजोदड़ो) सेलखड़ी (साबुन के पत्थर) से उकेरा गया है; शारीरिक पुरुष धड़ (हड़प्पा) लाल बलुआ पत्थर का है; और आम खिलौने पकी हुई मिट्टी (टेराकोटा) के बने होते थे।"},"99":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect because graves regularly contained grave goods like pottery, ornaments, and copper mirrors, which clearly indicates a belief in the afterlife.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि कब्रों में नियमित रूप से मिट्टी के बर्तन, आभूषण और तांबे के दर्पण जैसी वस्तुएं होती थीं, जो स्पष्ट रूप से मृत्यु के बाद के जीवन में विश्वास का संकेत देती हैं।"},"100":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The iconic Priest-King statue is depicted wearing a shawl draped over the left shoulder and under the right arm, elaborately decorated with a 'trefoil' (three-leaf) pattern, a motif that also signifies links with Mesopotamian art.","explanation_hi":"प्रतिष्ठित पुरोहित-राजा की मूर्ति को बाएं कंधे के ऊपर और दाहिने हाथ के नीचे शॉल ओढ़े हुए दर्शाया गया है, जिसे 'तिपतिया' (तीन-पत्ती) पैटर्न से विस्तृत रूप से सजाया गया है, यह एक ऐसा डिज़ाइन है जो मेसोपोटामिया की कला के साथ संबंध भी दर्शाता है।"},"101":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The statement is incorrect. Harappan pottery was highly advanced, and the vast majority of it was mass-produced on the potter's wheel, not hand-made. Plain wheel-turned pottery was much more common than painted ware.","explanation_hi":"यह कथन गलत है। हड़प्पा के मिट्टी के बर्तन अत्यधिक उन्नत थे, और इनमें से अधिकांश हाथ से नहीं, बल्कि कुम्हार के चाक पर बड़े पैमाने पर बनाए जाते थे। सादे चाक वाले बर्तन चित्रित बर्तनों की तुलना में बहुत अधिक आम थे।"},"102":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The assertion is true. The reason is also logically true and provides the direct archaeological evidence (the widespread presence of amulets) that leads historians to conclude the Harappans believed in warding off evil spirits.","explanation_hi":"दावा सत्य है। कारण भी तार्किक रूप से सत्य है और प्रत्यक्ष पुरातात्विक प्रमाण (ताबीज की व्यापक उपस्थिति) प्रदान करता है जो इतिहासकारों को यह निष्कर्ष निकालने की ओर ले जाता है कि हड़प्पावासी बुरी आत्माओं को दूर भगाने में विश्वास करते थे।"},"103":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Evidence of a board game resembling modern chess, along with cubical terracotta dice bearing distinct markings (1 to 6) exactly like modern dice, have been famously recovered from the site of Lothal in Gujarat.","explanation_hi":"आधुनिक शतरंज से मिलते-जुलते एक बोर्ड गेम के साक्ष्य, साथ ही घनाकार टेराकोटा पासे जिन पर आधुनिक पासे की तरह ही अलग-अलग निशान (1 से 6 तक) हैं, गुजरात के लोथल स्थल से प्राप्त हुए हैं।"},"104":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; numerous seals featuring the Swastika symbol have been discovered, predating the Vedic period. Statement 2 is incorrect; the cow became sacred in the Vedic age. To the Harappans, the humpless bull and unicorn were sacred.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; वैदिक काल से पहले के स्वास्तिक प्रतीक वाली कई मुहरें खोजी गई हैं। कथन 2 गलत है; वैदिक युग में गाय पवित्र हो गई। हड़प्पावासियों के लिए, कुबड़ रहित बैल और यूनिकॉर्न पवित्र थे।"},"105":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The statement is incorrect. While the elite classes wore gold, silver, and precious stones, the common people wore extensive ornaments made of affordable everyday materials like copper, bronze, shell, terracotta, and bone.","explanation_hi":"यह कथन गलत है। जबकि संभ्रांत वर्ग सोने, चांदी और कीमती पत्थरों को पहनता था, आम लोग तांबे, कांस्य, शंख, टेराकोटा और हड्डी जैसी सस्ती रोजमर्रा की सामग्री से बने व्यापक आभूषण पहनते थे।"}}