{"756":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Sir Thomas Roe arrived at Jahangir's court in 1615 as the ambassador of King James I. He stayed until 1619 and successfully obtained a firman (royal order) to establish English factories in Mughal territory.","explanation_hi":"सर थॉमस रो 1615 में राजा जेम्स प्रथम के राजदूत के रूप में जहाँगीर के दरबार में आए थे। वह 1619 तक रहे और मुग़ल क्षेत्र में अंग्रेज़ी कारखाने स्थापित करने के लिए एक फरमान (शाही आदेश) प्राप्त करने में सफल रहे।"},"757":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The Nur Jahan junta heavily influenced Mughal politics between 1611 and 1622. It fractured when Nur Jahan married her daughter (from her first husband) to Shahryar and supported his claim over Khurram (Shah Jahan).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। 1611 से 1622 के बीच नूरजहाँ के गुट ने मुग़ल राजनीति को काफी प्रभावित किया। यह तब टूट गया जब नूरजहाँ ने (अपने पहले पति से) अपनी बेटी की शादी शहरयार से कर दी और खुर्रम (शाहजहाँ) के ऊपर उसके दावे का समर्थन किया।"},"758":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Guru Arjan Dev, the fifth Sikh Guru, was executed by Jahangir in 1606. Jahangir accused him of aiding and blessing his eldest son, Prince Khusrau, who had rebelled against the Emperor.","explanation_hi":"सिखों के पांचवें गुरु, गुरु अर्जन देव को 1606 में जहाँगीर ने फाँसी दे दी थी। जहाँगीर ने उन पर अपने सबसे बड़े बेटे, राजकुमार खुसरो की सहायता करने और उसे आशीर्वाद देने का आरोप लगाया था, जिसने सम्राट के खिलाफ विद्रोह किया था।"},"759":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Assertion is true as his reign saw the zenith of Mughal architecture (Taj Mahal, Jama Masjid). However, the Reason is false because he actually replaced red sandstone (used largely by Akbar) with extensive use of white marble.","explanation_hi":"अभिकथन सत्य है क्योंकि उनके शासनकाल में मुग़ल वास्तुकला (ताजमहल, जामा मस्जिद) अपने चरम पर थी। हालाँकि, कारण असत्य है क्योंकि उन्होंने वास्तव में लाल बलुआ पत्थर (अकबर द्वारा बड़े पैमाने पर प्रयुक्त) के स्थान पर सफेद संगमरमर के व्यापक उपयोग को बढ़ावा दिया।"},"760":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The chronological sequence is: Battle of Bahadurpur (Feb 1658) where Shuja was defeated; Battle of Dharmat (April 1658) where Jaswant Singh was defeated; Battle of Samugarh (May 1658) where Dara was decisively beaten; Battle of Deorai (March 1659) which was the final defeat of Dara.","explanation_hi":"कालानुक्रमिक क्रम है: बहादुरपुर का युद्ध (फरवरी 1658) जहाँ शुजा हार गया; धरमत का युद्ध (अप्रैल 1658) जहाँ जसवंत सिंह हार गया; सामूगढ़ का युद्ध (मई 1658) जहाँ दारा निर्णायक रूप से हार गया; देवराई का युद्ध (मार्च 1659) जो दारा की अंतिम हार थी।"},"761":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque) inside the Red Fort complex in Delhi was built by Shah Jahan's son and successor, Aurangzeb, for his personal use. Shah Jahan built the Moti Masjid located in the Agra Fort.","explanation_hi":"दिल्ली में लाल किला परिसर के अंदर मोती मस्जिद (पर्ल मस्जिद) का निर्माण शाहजहाँ के पुत्र और उत्तराधिकारी औरंगज़ेब ने अपने व्यक्तिगत उपयोग के लिए करवाया था। शाहजहाँ ने आगरा के किले में स्थित मोती मस्जिद का निर्माण करवाया था।"},"762":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Akbar built the Agra Fort. Jahangir built the Shalimar Bagh in Srinagar. Nur Jahan commissioned the highly refined Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula (her father) in Agra. Shah Jahan built the Red Fort in Delhi.","explanation_hi":"अकबर ने आगरा का किला बनवाया। जहाँगीर ने श्रीनगर में शालीमार बाग बनवाया। नूरजहाँ ने आगरा में (अपने पिता) एतमादुद्दौला के अत्यधिक परिष्कृत मकबरे का निर्माण करवाया। शाहजहाँ ने दिल्ली में लाल किला बनवाया।"},"763":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The 1615 treaty ended the long-standing Mughal-Mewar conflict. Jahangir treated Amar Singh with respect, exempted him from personal attendance at the court, and restored Chittor with the condition of non-fortification.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। 1615 की संधि ने लंबे समय से चले आ रहे मुग़ल-मेवाड़ संघर्ष को समाप्त कर दिया। जहाँगीर ने अमर सिंह के साथ सम्मानपूर्वक व्यवहार किया, उन्हें दरबार में व्यक्तिगत उपस्थिति से छूट दी, और किलेबंदी न करने की शर्त के साथ चित्तौड़ वापस कर दिया।"},"764":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Jahangir was a great patron of painting. He awarded the title 'Nadir-ul-Asr' to Ustad Mansur, who specialized in flora and fauna, and 'Nadir-uz-Zaman' to Abul Hasan, who was exceptional in portraiture.","explanation_hi":"जहाँगीर चित्रकला का महान संरक्षक था। उसने उस्ताद मंसूर को 'नादिर-उल-असर' की उपाधि दी, जो वनस्पतियों और जीवों के चित्रण में विशेषज्ञ थे, और अबुल हसन को 'नादिर-उज़-ज़मान' की उपाधि दी, जो चित्र (पोर्ट्रेट) बनाने में असाधारण थे।"},"765":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both statements are true and Reason accurately explains the Assertion. Shah Abbas of Persia captured Kandahar in 1622. Shah Jahan, suspecting Nur Jahan's motives to clear his presence and install Shahryar, rebelled instead of marching to Kandahar.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सत्य हैं और कारण अभिकथन की सटीक व्याख्या करता है। फ़ारस के शाह अब्बास ने 1622 में कंधार पर कब्ज़ा कर लिया था। शाहजहाँ ने नूरजहाँ के उद्देश्यों (उसे हटाकर शहरयार को स्थापित करने) पर संदेह करते हुए, कंधार जाने के बजाय विद्रोह कर दिया।"},"766":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Chronology: Buland Darwaza was built by Akbar (c. 1575); Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daula was commissioned by Nur Jahan during Jahangir's reign (c. 1622); Taj Mahal was built by Shah Jahan (started c. 1632); Bibi Ka Maqbara was built during Aurangzeb's reign (c. 1660).","explanation_hi":"कालक्रम: बुलंद दरवाज़ा अकबर द्वारा बनवाया गया (लगभग 1575); एतमादुद्दौला का मकबरा नूरजहाँ द्वारा जहाँगीर के शासनकाल में (लगभग 1622); ताजमहल शाहजहाँ द्वारा (लगभग 1632 शुरू); बीबी का मकबरा औरंगज़ेब के शासनकाल में (लगभग 1660) बनवाया गया।"},"767":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Jahangir installed a golden chain with bells attached to it outside the Agra Fort. Any subject who felt they were denied justice by local officials could pull the chain, ringing the bells, to appeal directly to the Emperor.","explanation_hi":"जहाँगीर ने आगरा के किले के बाहर घंटियों से जुड़ी एक सोने की जंजीर लगवाई थी। कोई भी प्रजा जिसे लगता था कि स्थानीय अधिकारियों द्वारा उसे न्याय नहीं मिला है, वह जंजीर खींचकर घंटी बजा सकता था, जिससे सीधे सम्राट से अपील की जा सके।"},"768":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Shah Jahan's Deccan policy was highly successful compared to his predecessors. He ended the Ahmadnagar state in 1633 and brought Golconda and Bijapur into the Mughal sphere of influence via treaties in 1636.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। शाहजहाँ की दक्कन नीति अपने पूर्ववर्तियों की तुलना में अत्यधिक सफल रही। उसने 1633 में अहमदनगर राज्य का अंत कर दिया और 1636 में संधियों के माध्यम से गोलकुंडा और बीजापुर को मुग़ल प्रभाव क्षेत्र में ले लिया।"},"769":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Peacock Throne (Takht-i-Taus), encrusted with precious stones including the Koh-i-Noor diamond, was designed by Bebadal Khan, the superintendent of the goldsmith's department under Shah Jahan. Ustad Ahmad Lahauri was the chief architect of the Taj Mahal.","explanation_hi":"मयूर सिंहासन (तख्त-ए-ताऊस), जिसमें कोहिनूर हीरे सहित कीमती पत्थर जड़े थे, शाहजहाँ के अधीन सुनार विभाग के अधीक्षक बेबादल खान द्वारा डिज़ाइन किया गया था। उस्ताद अहमद लाहौरी ताजमहल के मुख्य वास्तुकार थे।"},"770":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The statement about Shah Jahan conquering trans-Oxiana is incorrect. Although Shah Jahan launched a massive campaign in 1646 to conquer Balkh and Badakhshan (ancestral Timurid lands), it was a costly failure, and the Mughals had to ultimately abandon the region.","explanation_hi":"शाहजहाँ द्वारा ट्रांस-ऑक्सियाना पर विजय प्राप्त करने का कथन गलत है। यद्यपि शाहजहाँ ने 1646 में बल्ख और बदख्शां (पैतृक तैमूरी भूमि) को जीतने के लिए एक बड़ा अभियान शुरू किया, लेकिन यह एक बहुत महँगी विफलता थी, और मुग़लों को अंततः इस क्षेत्र को छोड़ना पड़ा।"}}