{"286":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Buddhist text 'Anguttara Nikaya' and the Jain text 'Bhagavati Sutra' are the primary literary sources that provide the list of the sixteen great states (Mahajanapadas) of ancient India.","explanation_hi":"बौद्ध ग्रंथ 'अंगुत्तर निकाय' और जैन ग्रंथ 'भगवती सूत्र' प्राथमिक साहित्यिक स्रोत हैं जो प्राचीन भारत के सोलह महान राज्यों (महाजनपदों) की सूची प्रदान करते हैं।"},"287":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The capital of Anga was Champa (in present-day Bihar). Vatsa had its capital at Kaushambi (near Prayagraj). Matsya was centered around Viratnagar (in Rajasthan). Surasena's capital was Mathura.","explanation_hi":"अंग की राजधानी चंपा (वर्तमान बिहार में) थी। वत्स की राजधानी कौशाम्बी (प्रयागराज के पास) थी। मत्स्य विराटनगर (राजस्थान में) के आसपास केंद्रित था। शूरसेन की राजधानी मथुरा थी।"},"288":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 1 is incorrect because Vajji and Malla were not monarchies; they were oligarchic republics (Ganasanghas) where a council of clan heads ruled. Statement 2 is correct as Vaishali was indeed the capital of the Vajji confederacy.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 गलत है क्योंकि वज्जि और मल्ल राजतंत्र नहीं थे; वे कुलीनतंत्रीय गणराज्य (गणसंघ) थे जहां कबीले के प्रमुखों की एक परिषद शासन करती थी। कथन 2 सही है क्योंकि वैशाली वास्तव में वज्जि संघ की राजधानी थी।"},"289":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Assaka (or Asmaka) was the only Mahajanapada located south of the Vindhya Range. It was situated on the banks of the Godavari river, with its capital at Potana or Paudanya (in present-day Maharashtra).","explanation_hi":"अश्मक (या अस्मक) विंध्य पर्वतमाला के दक्षिण में स्थित एकमात्र महाजनपद था। यह गोदावरी नदी के तट पर स्थित था, जिसकी राजधानी पोतन या पौदन्य (वर्तमान महाराष्ट्र में) थी।"},"290":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both are true. Magadha's success was largely due to its control over the iron ore deposits of south Bihar, which allowed for superior weapons and agricultural tools. Additionally, Rajgriha was surrounded by five hills, and Pataliputra was surrounded by rivers (Jaladurga), making them nearly impregnable.","explanation_hi":"दोनों सत्य हैं। मगध की सफलता काफी हद तक दक्षिण बिहार के लौह अयस्क भंडार पर इसके नियंत्रण के कारण थी, जिससे बेहतर हथियार और कृषि उपकरण बनाने में मदद मिली। इसके अतिरिक्त, राजगृह पांच पहाड़ियों से घिरा हुआ था, और पाटलिपुत्र नदियों (जलदुर्ग) से घिरा हुआ था, जिससे वे लगभग अभेद्य हो गए।"},"291":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The capital of Panchala was Ahichhatra (Northern) and Kampilya (Southern). Taxila (Takshashila) was the capital of the Gandhara Mahajanapada, famous as a major center of learning and trade.","explanation_hi":"पांचाल की राजधानी अहिच्छत्र (उत्तरी) और काम्पिल्य (दक्षिणी) थी। तक्षशिला गांधार महाजनपद की राजधानी थी, जो शिक्षा और व्यापार के एक प्रमुख केंद्र के रूप में प्रसिद्ध थी।"},"292":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Large Mahajanapadas were often divided administratively by rivers. Avanti was divided by the Narmada (or Vindhyas) with Ujjaini in the north and Mahishmati in the south. Panchala was divided by the river Bhagirathi into Ahichhatra and Kampilya.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। बड़े महाजनपदों को अक्सर नदियों द्वारा प्रशासनिक रूप से विभाजित किया जाता था। अवन्ति को नर्मदा (या विंध्य) द्वारा उत्तर में उज्जैनी और दक्षिण में महिष्मती में विभाजित किया गया था। पांचाल को भागीरथी नदी द्वारा अहिच्छत्र और काम्पिल्य में विभाजित किया गया था।"},"293":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The correct West to East order is: Gandhara (modern-day Pakistan/Afghanistan), Kuru (modern-day Haryana/Delhi), Kosala (modern-day eastern Uttar Pradesh), and Anga (modern-day eastern Bihar/Bengal border). Hence, 2-1-4-3.","explanation_hi":"पश्चिम से पूर्व का सही क्रम है: गांधार (वर्तमान पाकिस्तान/अफगानिस्तान), कुरु (वर्तमान हरियाणा/दिल्ली), कोसल (वर्तमान पूर्वी उत्तर प्रदेश), और अंग (वर्तमान पूर्वी बिहार/बंगाल सीमा)। अतः, 2-1-4-3।"},"294":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Matsya Mahajanapada was located in present-day Rajasthan, covering parts of Jaipur, Alwar, and Bharatpur districts. Its capital Viratnagar is currently known as Bairat (in Jaipur district).","explanation_hi":"मत्स्य महाजनपद वर्तमान राजस्थान में स्थित था, जिसमें जयपुर, अलवर और भरतपुर जिलों के हिस्से शामिल थे। इसकी राजधानी विराटनगर को वर्तमान में बैराठ (जयपुर जिले में) के नाम से जाना जाता है।"},"295":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Gandhara's capital was Taxila. Kamboja (located in the Hindukush/Kashmir region) had its capital at Rajpur or Poonch. Assaka's capital was Potana/Paudanya. Chedi (in the Bundelkhand region) had its capital at Suktimati.","explanation_hi":"गांधार की राजधानी तक्षशिला थी। कंबोज (हिंदुकुश/कश्मीर क्षेत्र में स्थित) की राजधानी राजपुर या पुंछ थी। अश्मक की राजधानी पोतन/पौदन्य थी। चेदि (बुंदेलखंड क्षेत्र में) की राजधानी शुक्तिमती थी।"},"296":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Assertion (A) is false because Vajji was a confederacy of eight clans (an oligarchic republic), NOT a monarchy. Reason (R) is true; Vaishali was the capital of this confederacy. The Magadhan king Ajatashatru eventually defeated them using military innovations.","explanation_hi":"कथन (A) गलत है क्योंकि वज्जि आठ कुलों का एक संघ (एक कुलीनतंत्रीय गणराज्य) था, राजतंत्र नहीं। कारण (R) सत्य है; वैशाली इस संघ की राजधानी थी। मगध के राजा अजातशत्रु ने अंततः सैन्य नवाचारों का उपयोग करके उन्हें हरा दिया।"},"297":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Rajgriha's natural fortification by five hills (a 'Giridurga') protected it in early times. Later, Udayin recognized the commercial and strategic value of the river confluence and moved the capital to Pataliputra (a 'Jaladurga' or water fort).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। पांच पहाड़ियों (एक 'गिरिदुर्ग') द्वारा राजगृह की प्राकृतिक किलेबंदी ने शुरुआती समय में इसकी रक्षा की। बाद में, उदायिन ने नदी संगम के व्यावसायिक और रणनीतिक मूल्य को पहचाना और राजधानी को पाटलिपुत्र (एक 'जलदुर्ग') में स्थानांतरित कर दिया।"},"298":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"King Bimbisara sent his celebrated royal physician Jivaka to Ujjain to cure King Pradyota (Chanda Pradyota) of the Avanti Mahajanapada, who was suffering from jaundice. This diplomatic gesture helped Magadha secure peaceful relations with its powerful western rival.","explanation_hi":"राजा बिंबिसार ने अवन्ति महाजनपद के राजा प्रद्योत (चंड प्रद्योत) को ठीक करने के लिए अपने प्रसिद्ध शाही चिकित्सक जीवक को उज्जैन भेजा था, जो पीलिया से पीड़ित थे। इस कूटनीतिक कदम ने मगध को अपने शक्तिशाली पश्चिमी प्रतिद्वंद्वी के साथ शांतिपूर्ण संबंध सुरक्षित करने में मदद की।"},"299":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"The statement regarding Vatsa is incorrect. The capital of the Vatsa Mahajanapada was Kaushambi. Champa was the capital of the Anga Mahajanapada, which was indeed a major center of trade and commerce before being annexed by Magadha.","explanation_hi":"वत्स के संबंध में कथन गलत है। वत्स महाजनपद की राजधानी कौशाम्बी थी। चंपा अंग महाजनपद की राजधानी थी, जो वास्तव में मगध द्वारा कब्जा किए जाने से पहले व्यापार और वाणिज्य का एक प्रमुख केंद्र था।"},"300":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Kosala, a powerful kingdom under Prasenajit, had Shravasti as its capital and exercised suzerainty over the Shakya republic (Buddha's clan). Anga (capital Champa) was defeated by Bimbisara and was the earliest conquest that initiated Magadha's imperial expansion.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। प्रसेनजित के अधीन एक शक्तिशाली राज्य कोसल की राजधानी श्रावस्ती थी और उसने शाक्य गणराज्य (बुद्ध के कबीले) पर अपना आधिपत्य जमाया। अंग (राजधानी चंपा) को बिंबिसार ने हरा दिया था और यह सबसे पहली विजय थी जिसने मगध के साम्राज्यवादी विस्तार की शुरुआत की।"}}