{"531":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Harshavardhana was a great patron of learning and authored three renowned plays: Ratnavali, Priyadarshika, and Nagananda. 'Malatimadhava' was written by the poet Bhavabhuti (who lived later, in the court of Yashovarman of Kannauj).","explanation_hi":"हर्षवर्धन विद्या के महान संरक्षक थे और उन्होंने तीन प्रसिद्ध नाटकों की रचना की: रत्नावली, प्रियदर्शिका और नागानंद। 'मालतीमाधव' कवि भवभूति (जो बाद में कन्नौज के यशोवर्मन के दरबार में रहे) द्वारा लिखा गया था।"},"532":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"According to Banabhatta's 'Harshacharita': Avanti was the supreme minister of war and peace; Singhanada was the Senapati (Commander-in-Chief); Kuntala was the head of the cavalry; and Skandagupta commanded the elephant wing.","explanation_hi":"बाणभट्ट के 'हर्षचरित' के अनुसार: अवंति युद्ध और शांति का सर्वोच्च मंत्री था; सिंहनाद सेनापति (प्रधान सेनापति) था; कुंतल अश्वारोही सेना का प्रमुख था; और स्कंदगुप्त गज (हाथी) विंग की कमान संभालते थे।"},"533":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Banskhera Copper Plate Inscription (628 CE) is historically famous because it contains the replica of Harsha's own signature (svahasto mama maharajadhiraja shri harshasya), showcasing his beautiful calligraphy.","explanation_hi":"बांसखेड़ा ताम्रपत्र अभिलेख (628 ई.) ऐतिहासिक रूप से प्रसिद्ध है क्योंकि इसमें हर्ष के स्वयं के हस्ताक्षर (स्वहस्तो मम महाराजाधिराज श्री हर्षस्य) की प्रतिकृति है, जो उनकी सुंदर सुलेखन कला को दर्शाती है।"},"534":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false. The Kannauj assembly was marked by intense sectarian bitterness. Orthodox Brahmins, feeling marginalized, attempted to burn down the pavilion and assassinate Harsha, leading to the banishment of many Brahmins.","explanation_hi":"अभिकथन (A) सत्य है, लेकिन कारण (R) गलत है। कन्नौज सभा में तीव्र सांप्रदायिक कटुता देखी गई थी। रूढ़िवादी ब्राह्मणों ने हा हाशिए पर महसूस करते हुए, मंडप को जलाने और हर्ष की हत्या करने का प्रयास किया, जिससे कई ब्राह्मणों को निर्वासित किया गया।"},"535":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 1 is incorrect because Hiuen Tsang himself recorded that he was robbed by bandits twice during his travels in India, indicating roads were not fully safe. Statement 2 is correct; he noted that criminal law was much harsher than in the Gupta period.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 गलत है क्योंकि ह्वेनसांग ने स्वयं दर्ज किया है कि भारत में अपनी यात्रा के दौरान उसे दो बार डाकुओं ने लूटा था, जो यह दर्शाता है कि सड़कें पूरी तरह से सुरक्षित नहीं थीं। कथन 2 सही है; उन्होंने उल्लेख किया कि आपराधिक कानून गुप्त काल की तुलना में बहुत कठोर था।"},"536":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Banabhatta (Harshacharita, Kadambari), Mayura (Suryashataka), and Divakara were prominent scholars in Harsha's court. Dandin (author of Dashakumaracharita) was a court poet of the Pallava kings in South India, not Harsha.","explanation_hi":"बाणभट्ट (हर्षचरित, कादम्बरी), मयूर (सूर्यशतक), और दिवाकर हर्ष के दरबार के प्रमुख विद्वान थे। दंडी (दशकुमारचरित के लेखक) दक्षिण भारत में पल्लव राजाओं के दरबारी कवि थे, हर्ष के नहीं।"},"537":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Assertion (A) is true. Reason (R) is false because Harsha was defeated by the Chalukya king Pulakeshin II, not the Rashtrakuta king Dantidurga. The Aihole inscription was composed by Ravikirti, the court poet of Pulakeshin II.","explanation_hi":"अभिकथन (A) सत्य है। कारण (R) गलत है क्योंकि हर्ष को चालुक्य राजा पुलकेशिन द्वितीय ने हराया था, न कि राष्ट्रकूट राजा दंतिदुर्ग ने। एहोल अभिलेख की रचना पुलकेशिन द्वितीय के दरबारी कवि रविकीर्ति ने की थी।"},"538":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In Harsha's administration, the empire was divided into provinces called Bhukti. The Bhukti was divided into districts called Vishaya. A Vishaya was further divided into tehsils/sub-districts called Pathaka, and the lowest unit was the Grama (village).","explanation_hi":"हर्ष के प्रशासन में, साम्राज्य को भुक्ति नामक प्रांतों में विभाजित किया गया था। भुक्ति को विषय नामक जिलों में विभाजित किया गया था। एक विषय को आगे पाठक नामक तहसीलों/उप-जिलों में विभाजित किया गया था, और सबसे निचली इकाई ग्राम (गाँव) थी।"},"539":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are true. Harsha exchanged envoys with Tang China. Wang Xuanze arrived in India around 647-648 CE to find Harsha dead and his throne usurped by a minister named Arunashva (Arjuna). Wang Xuanze gathered a Tibetan-Nepalese force to defeat him.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सत्य हैं। हर्ष ने तांग चीन के साथ दूतों का आदान-प्रदान किया। वांग ज़ुआनज़े 647-648 ई. के आसपास भारत आया, तब तक हर्ष की मृत्यु हो चुकी थी और उसके सिंहासन पर अरुणाश्व (अर्जुन) नामक मंत्री ने कब्जा कर लिया था। वांग ज़ुआनज़े ने उसे हराने के लिए एक तिब्बती-नेपाली सेना एकत्र की।"},"540":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Hiuen Tsang explicitly states that Harsha did not pay his high officials and ministers in cash. Instead, they were paid through land grants (one-fourth of the state's crown lands), highlighting the deep entrenchment of feudalism during his reign.","explanation_hi":"ह्वेनसांग स्पष्ट रूप से बताता है कि हर्ष ने अपने उच्च अधिकारियों और मंत्रियों को नकद भुगतान नहीं किया। इसके बजाय, उन्हें भूमि अनुदान (राज्य की मुकुट भूमि का एक-चौथाई) के माध्यम से भुगतान किया गया था, जो उनके शासनकाल के दौरान सामंतवाद की गहरी जड़ों को उजागर करता है।"},"541":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"'Nagananda' is a five-act Sanskrit play that tells the popular Buddhist legend of Vidyadhara King Jimutavahana, a Bodhisattva who offers his own body to the divine eagle Garuda to stop the mass consumption of Nagas.","explanation_hi":"'नागानंद' पांच अंकों का एक संस्कृत नाटक है जो विद्याधर राजा जीमूतवाहन, एक बोधिसत्व की लोकप्रिय बौद्ध किंवदंती बताता है, जो नागों के बड़े पैमाने पर भक्षण को रोकने के लिए दिव्य गरुड़ को अपना शरीर प्रदान करता है।"},"542":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"In the post-Gupta and Harsha's administration, 'Chatas' and 'Bhatas' referred to regular and irregular troops or police officers who were responsible for maintaining local law and order and capturing criminals.","explanation_hi":"गुप्तोत्तर और हर्ष के प्रशासन में, 'चाट' और 'भाट' नियमित और अनियमित सैनिकों या पुलिस अधिकारियों को संदर्भित करते थे जो स्थानीय कानून और व्यवस्था बनाए रखने और अपराधियों को पकड़ने के लिए जिम्मेदार थे।"},"543":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All statements are correct. The Maha Moksha Parishad at Prayag was a massive charitable festival held quinquennially. Harsha would literally empty the state treasury, giving alms to Buddhists, Brahmins, Jains, and the destitute. Xuanzang attended the 6th assembly.","explanation_hi":"सभी कथन सही हैं। प्रयाग में महा मोक्ष परिषद हर पांच साल में आयोजित होने वाला एक विशाल धर्मार्थ उत्सव था। हर्ष सचमुच राजकोष को खाली कर देता था, और बौद्धों, ब्राह्मणों, जैनियों और निराश्रितों को भिक्षा देता था। जुआनज़ांग ने 6वीं सभा में भाग लिया था।"},"544":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All statements are correct. Hiuen Tsang wrote that Harsha divided his state income into four parts: (1) for routine government expenses, (2) for paying public servants, (3) for rewarding intellectuals, and (4) for religious endowments/charity.","explanation_hi":"सभी कथन सही हैं। ह्वेनसांग ने लिखा है कि हर्ष ने अपनी राज्य की आय को चार भागों में विभाजित किया: (1) नियमित सरकारी खर्चों के लिए, (2) लोक सेवकों को भुगतान करने के लिए, (3) बुद्धिजीवियों को पुरस्कृत करने के लिए, और (4) धार्मिक अनुदान/दान के लिए।"},"545":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"According to Banabhatta and Harsha's own inscriptions, the early Pushyabhuti kings were Sun worshippers, but Harsha himself was initially a devout Shaivite (Paramamaheshvara) who worshipped Shiva (Nilalohita) before being influenced by Mahayana Buddhism.","explanation_hi":"बाणभट्ट और हर्ष के स्वयं के अभिलेखों के अनुसार, प्रारंभिक पुष्यभूति राजा सूर्य उपासक थे, लेकिन हर्ष स्वयं शुरू में एक कट्टर शैव (परममाहेश्वर) थे जो महायान बौद्ध धर्म से प्रभावित होने से पहले शिव (नीललोहित) की पूजा करते थे।"}}