{"246":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both the assertion and the reason are correct. One of the primary reasons for the decline of Buddhism was its absorption into Hinduism. The Puranas declared Buddha as the 9th avatar of Vishnu, blurring the theological lines and drawing Buddhist laymen back into the Hindu fold.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं। बौद्ध धर्म के पतन के प्राथमिक कारणों में से एक हिंदू धर्म में इसका अवशोषण था। पुराणों ने बुद्ध को विष्णु का 9वां अवतार घोषित किया, जिससे धार्मिक रेखाएं धुंधली हो गईं और बौद्ध आम आदमी वापस हिंदू व्यवस्था में आ गए।"},"247":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"King Kharavela of Kalinga patronized Jainism (Udayagiri caves). Pala king Dharmapala patronized Vajrayana Buddhism (Vikramashila). Rashtrakuta king Amoghavarsha was a devout Jain. Kushana king Kanishka patronized Mahayana Buddhism and held the 4th Council.","explanation_hi":"कलिंग के राजा खारवेल ने जैन धर्म (उदयगिरि गुफाओं) को संरक्षण दिया। पाल राजा धर्मपाल ने वज्रयान बौद्ध धर्म (विक्रमशिला) को संरक्षण दिया। राष्ट्रकूट राजा अमोघवर्ष एक कट्टर जैन थे। कुषाण राजा कनिष्क ने महायान बौद्ध धर्म को संरक्षण दिया और चौथी संगीति आयोजित की।"},"248":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 3 are correct. The use of vernaculars and their egalitarian approach drove their mass appeal. Statement 2 is incorrect because Jainism received massive royal patronage from the Mauryas (Chandragupta), Mahameghavahanas (Kharavela), Chalukyas, and Rashtrakutas.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 3 सही हैं। स्थानीय भाषाओं के उपयोग और उनके समतावादी दृष्टिकोण ने उनकी जन अपील को बढ़ाया। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि जैन धर्म को मौर्यों (चंद्रगुप्त), महामेघवाहनों (खारवेल), चालुक्यों और राष्ट्रकूटों से भारी शाही संरक्षण प्राप्त हुआ था।"},"249":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Bakhtiyar Khalji, a general of Muhammad Ghori, led military campaigns into Bihar and Bengal around 1193-1200 CE. He mercilessly sacked and burned the great Buddhist universities of Nalanda, Vikramashila, and Odantapuri, slaughtering thousands of monks and destroying ancient libraries.","explanation_hi":"मुहम्मद गोरी के सेनापति बख्तियार खिलजी ने 1193-1200 ईस्वी के आसपास बिहार और बंगाल में सैन्य अभियानों का नेतृत्व किया। उसने बेरहमी से नालंदा, विक्रमशिला और ओदंतपुरी के महान बौद्ध विश्वविद्यालयों को लूट कर जला दिया, हजारों भिक्षुओं की हत्या कर दी और प्राचीन पुस्तकालयों को नष्ट कर दिया।"},"250":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Buddhism's fatal flaw was its over-dependence on institutionalized Viharas. When invaders destroyed the Viharas and killed the monks, the religion collapsed. Jainism survived because it was sustained by a decentralized network of wealthy merchant laymen (Sravakas).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। बौद्ध धर्म की सबसे बड़ी कमजोरी संस्थागत विहारों पर इसकी अत्यधिक निर्भरता थी। जब आक्रमणकारियों ने विहारों को नष्ट कर दिया और भिक्षुओं को मार डाला, तो धर्म ढह गया। जैन धर्म इसलिए जीवित रहा क्योंकि इसे धनी व्यापारी आम लोगों (श्रावकों) के एक विकेन्द्रीकृत नेटवर्क द्वारा बनाए रखा गया था।"},"251":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Pala kings (8th-12th century CE) were great patrons of Vajrayana (Tantric) Buddhism. They established universities like Vikramashila and Somapura. Scholars from these universities traveled to Tibet and established Vajrayana as the dominant religion there.","explanation_hi":"पाल राजा (8वीं-12वीं शताब्दी ईस्वी) वज्रयान (तांत्रिक) बौद्ध धर्म के महान संरक्षक थे। उन्होंने विक्रमशिला और सोमपुरा जैसे विश्वविद्यालयों की स्थापना की। इन विश्वविद्यालयों के विद्वानों ने तिब्बत की यात्रा की और वहां वज्रयान को प्रमुख धर्म के रूप में स्थापित किया।"},"252":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Solanki (Chalukya) dynasty of Gujarat strongly patronized Jainism. The famous Dilwara Jain Temples at Mount Abu (Rajasthan) were built by Vimal Shah, a minister of the Solanki king Bhima I, showcasing the immense wealth and devotion of Jain patrons in the region.","explanation_hi":"गुजरात के सोलंकी (चालुक्य) राजवंश ने जैन धर्म को बहुत संरक्षण दिया। माउंट आबू (राजस्थान) में प्रसिद्ध दिलवाड़ा जैन मंदिर सोलंकी राजा भीम प्रथम के मंत्री विमल शाह द्वारा बनाए गए थे, जो इस क्षेत्र में जैन संरक्षकों की अपार संपत्ति और भक्ति को दर्शाते हैं।"},"253":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All statements are correct. Historical analysis shows that Buddhism decayed internally before external invasions destroyed it. Rich, corrupt monasteries lost public sympathy; Sanskrit replaced the easily understood Pali; and Tantric (Vajrayana) practices alienated orthodox followers.","explanation_hi":"सभी कथन सही हैं। ऐतिहासिक विश्लेषण से पता चलता है कि विदेशी आक्रमणों द्वारा इसे नष्ट करने से पहले बौद्ध धर्म आंतरिक रूप से क्षीण हो गया था। अमीर, भ्रष्ट मठों ने जनता की सहानुभूति खो दी; आसानी से समझी जाने वाली पाली की जगह संस्कृत ने ले ली; और तांत्रिक (वज्रयान) प्रथाओं ने रूढ़िवादी अनुयायियों को दूर कर दिया।"},"254":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Harshavardhana was actually one of the greatest patrons of Mahayana Buddhism in ancient India. He organized the Kannauj assembly to popularize Mahayana doctrines and generously patronized Nalanda University. Pushyamitra, Shashanka, and Mihirakula are documented by Buddhist texts as persecutors.","explanation_hi":"हर्षवर्धन वास्तव में प्राचीन भारत में महायान बौद्ध धर्म के सबसे बड़े संरक्षकों में से एक था। उसने महायान सिद्धांतों को लोकप्रिय बनाने के लिए कन्नौज सभा का आयोजन किया और नालंदा विश्वविद्यालय को उदारतापूर्वक संरक्षण दिया। पुष्यमित्र, शशांक और मिहिरकुल को बौद्ध ग्रंथों द्वारा उत्पीड़कों के रूप में प्रलेखित किया गया है।"},"255":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Jainism had a profound impact on ancient Tamil literature. 'Silappatikaram' emphasizes Jain moral principles, and its author Ilango Adigal was an ascetic. 'Jivaka Chintamani', completely rooted in Jain philosophy, was written by the Jain monk Tirutakkatevar.","explanation_hi":"प्राचीन तमिल साहित्य पर जैन धर्म का गहरा प्रभाव था। 'शिलप्पादिकारम' जैन नैतिक सिद्धांतों पर जोर देता है, और इसके लेखक इलांगो अडिगल एक तपस्वी थे। 'जीवक चिंतामणि', पूरी तरह से जैन दर्शन में निहित है, जिसे जैन भिक्षु तिरुतक्कतेवर ने लिखा था।"}}