{"511":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Gupta rulers were predominantly Vaishnavas. Bhagavatism, centered around the worship of Lord Vishnu and his avatars, reached its peak during this period, though the kings remained tolerant of other faiths.","explanation_hi":"गुप्त शासक मुख्य रूप से वैष्णव थे। भगवान विष्णु और उनके अवतारों की पूजा पर केंद्रित भागवत धर्म, इस अवधि के दौरान अपने चरम पर पहुंच गया, हालांकि राजा अन्य धर्मों के प्रति सहिष्णु रहे।"},"512":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 3 are correct. Smriti literature of the period expanded the scope of Stridhana. Statement 2 is incorrect; the practice of Swayamvara declined, and pre-puberty/child marriages became increasingly common.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 3 सही हैं। उस काल के स्मृति साहित्य ने स्त्रीधन के दायरे का विस्तार किया। कथन 2 गलत है; स्वयंवर की प्रथा में गिरावट आई, और यौवन-पूर्व/बाल विवाह तेजी से आम हो गए।"},"513":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both A and R are true, and R correctly explains A. The integration of foreigners (like Hunas, Sakas) as Kshatriyas and the expansion of agriculture into tribal lands led to the creation of numerous new Jatis within the traditional Varna system.","explanation_hi":"A और R दोनों सत्य हैं, और R, A की सही व्याख्या करता है। विदेशियों (जैसे हूण, शक) का क्षत्रियों के रूप में एकीकरण और आदिवासी भूमि में कृषि के विस्तार से पारंपरिक वर्ण व्यवस्था के भीतर कई नई जातियों का निर्माण हुआ।"},"514":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Fa-Hien, who visited India during the reign of Chandragupta II, noted that the Chandalas lived outside the villages and had to strike a piece of wood to announce their arrival to avoid polluting others.","explanation_hi":"चन्द्रगुप्त द्वितीय के शासनकाल के दौरान भारत का दौरा करने वाले फाह्यान ने उल्लेख किया कि चांडाल गांवों के बाहर रहते थे और दूसरों को प्रदूषित करने से बचने के लिए अपने आगमन की घोषणा करने के लिए उन्हें लकड़ी का एक टुकड़ा बजाना पड़ता था।"},"515":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The magnificent Varaha (boar) sculpture rescuing the earth goddess is at Udayagiri. The reclining Sheshashayi Vishnu is at Deogarh. River goddesses Ganga and Yamuna became standard features on temple doorways. Harihara represents the syncretism of Shiva and Vishnu.","explanation_hi":"पृथ्वी देवी को बचाने वाली शानदार वराह (सूअर) मूर्ति उदयगिरि में है। लेटे हुए शेषशायी विष्णु देवगढ़ में हैं। नदी देवी गंगा और यमुना मंदिर के दरवाजों पर मानक विशेषताएं बन गईं। हरिहर शिव और विष्णु के समन्वयवाद का प्रतिनिधित्व करते हैं।"},"516":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Option 1 is incorrect because slavery definitely existed during the Gupta period. The Narada Smriti elaborately discusses the laws of slavery, categorizing 15 types of slaves and detailing how they could achieve emancipation.","explanation_hi":"विकल्प 1 गलत है क्योंकि गुप्त काल के दौरान दास प्रथा निश्चित रूप से मौजूद थी। नारद स्मृति दासता के कानूनों पर विस्तार से चर्चा करती है, 15 प्रकार के दासों को वर्गीकृत करती है और यह भी बताती है कि वे कैसे मुक्ति प्राप्त कर सकते हैं।"},"517":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect. The Gupta rulers were deeply tolerant. They donated to Buddhist monasteries; for instance, Kumaragupta I founded the Nalanda Buddhist Mahavihara.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है। गुप्त शासक अत्यधिक सहिष्णु थे। उन्होंने बौद्ध मठों को दान दिया; उदाहरण के लिए, कुमारगुप्त प्रथम ने नालंदा बौद्ध महाविहार की स्थापना की।"},"518":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Gupta period witnessed the crystallization of Puranic Hinduism, where the Vedic gods lost prominence, and the Trimurti comprising Brahma (Creator), Vishnu (Preserver), and Shiva (Destroyer) became central to the religion.","explanation_hi":"गुप्त काल में पौराणिक हिंदू धर्म का स्फटिकीकरण देखा गया, जहां वैदिक देवताओं ने प्रमुखता खो दी, और ब्रह्मा (निर्माता), विष्णु (संरक्षक), और शिव (विनाशक) वाली त्रिमूर्ति धर्म का केंद्र बन गई।"},"519":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Vatsyayana's Kamasutra provides an extensive sociological glimpse into the prosperous urban life (nagaraka) of the Gupta period, discussing aesthetics, social gatherings, arts, and the highly cultured status of courtesans (ganikas).","explanation_hi":"वात्स्यायन का कामसूत्र गुप्त काल के समृद्ध शहरी जीवन (नागरक) की एक व्यापक समाजशास्त्रीय झलक प्रदान करता है, जिसमें सौंदर्यशास्त्र, सामाजिक समारोहों, कलाओं और वेश्याओं (गणिकाओं) की अत्यधिक सुसंस्कृत स्थिति पर चर्चा की गई है।"},"520":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All statements are correct. Agrahara/Brahmadeya grants transferred complete state prerogatives to the donees. This led to the decentralization of power (roots of feudalism) and culturally assimilated tribal regions into the agrarian Brahmanical fold.","explanation_hi":"सभी कथन सही हैं। अग्रहार/ब्रह्मदेय अनुदान ने दान प्राप्तकर्ताओं को पूर्ण राज्य विशेषाधिकार हस्तांतरित कर दिए। इससे सत्ता का विकेंद्रीकरण (सामंतवाद की जड़ें) हुआ और सांस्कृतिक रूप से आदिवासी क्षेत्रों को कृषि योग्य ब्राह्मणवादी तह में आत्मसात कर लिया गया।"}}