{"786":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Mir Bakhshi was the head of the military department. He managed the Mansabdari system, maintained troop records, and was also the head of the empire's intelligence and information agencies.","explanation_hi":"मीर बख्शी सैन्य विभाग का प्रमुख होता था। वह मनसबदारी प्रणाली का प्रबंधन करता था, सैनिकों के रिकॉर्ड रखता था, और साम्राज्य की खुफिया तथा सूचना एजेंसियों का प्रमुख भी होता था।"},"787":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 1 is incorrect because the Mansabdari system was NOT hereditary. Mansabs were granted, promoted, or dismissed at the Emperor's will. Statement 2 is correct as 'Zat' fixed the personal rank and pay, while 'Sawar' indicated cavalry obligations.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 गलत है क्योंकि मनसबदारी प्रणाली वंशानुगत नहीं थी। मनसब सम्राट की इच्छा पर प्रदान किए जाते थे, पदोन्नत किए जाते थे या बर्खास्त किए जाते थे। कथन 2 सही है क्योंकि 'ज़ात' व्यक्तिगत पद और वेतन तय करता था, जबकि 'सवार' घुड़सवार सैनिकों के दायित्व को दर्शाता था।"},"788":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"A Suba was headed by a Subahdar (Governor). A Sarkar was headed by a Faujdar (law & order) and Amalguzar (revenue). A Pargana was headed by a Shiqdar. The village headman was called the Muqaddam.","explanation_hi":"एक सूबा का प्रमुख सूबेदार (गवर्नर) होता था। एक सरकार का प्रमुख फौजदार (कानून व्यवस्था) और अमलगुजार (राजस्व) होता था। परगना का प्रमुख शिकदार होता था। गाँव के मुखिया को मुकद्दम कहा जाता था।"},"789":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Assertion is true as the Jagirdari crisis severely weakened the empire. However, the Reason is false. The crisis occurred because there was a massive INFLUX of new nobles (Marathas and Deccanis), leading to a shortage of productive jagirs to assign.","explanation_hi":"अभिकथन सत्य है क्योंकि जागीरदारी संकट ने साम्राज्य को गंभीर रूप से कमजोर कर दिया था। हालाँकि, कारण गलत है। संकट इसलिए आया क्योंकि नए अमीरों (मराठों और दक्कनियों) की भारी आमद हुई थी, जिससे आवंटन के लिए उत्पादक जागीरों की कमी हो गई।"},"790":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The match for 'Chachar' is incorrect. Chachar was land that remained fallow for 3 to 4 years. Land left uncultivated for 5 years or more was called 'Banjar'.","explanation_hi":"'चाचर' का मिलान गलत है। चाचर वह भूमि थी जो 3 से 4 वर्षों तक परती रहती थी। 5 वर्ष या उससे अधिक समय तक बिना खेती के छोड़ी गई भूमि को 'बंजर' कहा जाता था।"},"791":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"'Khalisa' (or Crown lands) were the territories whose revenue was collected directly for the Emperor's central treasury. It was used to pay the Emperor's personal expenses and the cash salaries (Naqdi) of his soldiers.","explanation_hi":"'खालसा' (या शाही भूमि) वे क्षेत्र थे जिनका राजस्व सीधे सम्राट के केंद्रीय खजाने के लिए एकत्र किया जाता था। इसका उपयोग सम्राट के व्यक्तिगत खर्चों और उसके सैनिकों के नकद वेतन (नकदी) का भुगतान करने के लिए किया जाता था।"},"792":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct. Statement 2 is incorrect because the Dahsala system actually converted the state's share of the 10-year average produce into cash rates (Dastur) based on local prices, making it a cash-based revenue system.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि दहसाला प्रणाली ने वास्तव में 10-वर्षीय औसत उपज के राज्य के हिस्से को स्थानीय कीमतों के आधार पर नकद दरों (दस्तूर) में परिवर्तित कर दिया था, जिससे यह एक नकद-आधारित राजस्व प्रणाली बन गई।"},"793":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Waqia-navis was the public news-writer or intelligence reporter posted in provinces. He regularly sent reports of all important events and occurrences in the province directly to the central government.","explanation_hi":"वाकिया-नवीस प्रांतों में तैनात सार्वजनिक समाचार-लेखक या खुफिया रिपोर्टर था। वह प्रांत की सभी महत्वपूर्ण घटनाओं और प्रसंगों की रिपोर्ट सीधे केंद्र सरकार को भेजता था।"},"794":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"An Amalguzar collected revenue in a Sarkar. A Muhtasib checked public morals and weights/measures. Qazi-ul-Quzat was the highest judicial authority (Chief Qazi). The Kotwal maintained law, order, and municipal administration in towns and cities.","explanation_hi":"एक अमलगुजार सरकार में राजस्व एकत्र करता था। एक मुहतसिब सार्वजनिक नैतिकता और बाट/माप की जांच करता था। काज़ी-उल-कुज़ात सर्वोच्च न्यायिक अधिकारी (मुख्य काज़ी) था। कोतवाल कस्बों और शहरों में कानून, व्यवस्था और नगरपालिका प्रशासन बनाए रखता था।"},"795":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The administrative hierarchy of the Mughal Empire in descending order of size was: Suba (Province), followed by Sarkar (District), then Pargana (Sub-district or group of villages), and finally Gram/Mahal (Village).","explanation_hi":"आकार के अवरोही क्रम में मुग़ल साम्राज्य का प्रशासनिक पदानुक्रम था: सूबा (प्रांत), उसके बाद सरकार (जिला), फिर परगना (उप-जिला या गाँवों का समूह), और अंत में ग्राम/महाल (गाँव)।"},"796":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct. 'Ahadis' were gentlemen troopers who answered directly to the Emperor. Statement 2 is incorrect because they were NOT placed under ordinary Mansabdars (they had their own separate commanders) and they received significantly higher salaries than regular troopers.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है। 'अहदी' विशिष्ट सैनिक थे जो सीधे सम्राट के अधीन थे। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि उन्हें साधारण मनसबदारों के अधीन नहीं रखा गया था (उनके अपने अलग कमांडर थे) और उन्हें नियमित सैनिकों की तुलना में काफी अधिक वेतन मिलता था।"},"797":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Mir Saman (also called Khan-i-Saman) was an important minister who was in charge of the imperial household, the royal bodyguards, and the Karkhanas (workshops that manufactured goods for the royal family and army).","explanation_hi":"मीर सामां (जिसे खान-ए-सामां भी कहा जाता था) एक महत्वपूर्ण मंत्री था जो शाही घराने, शाही अंगरक्षकों और कारखानों (वे कार्यशालाएँ जहाँ शाही परिवार और सेना के लिए सामान बनता था) का प्रभारी था।"},"798":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Assertion is true; most Mansabdars were Jagirdars paid via land revenue assignments. However, the Reason is false. A Jagir was neither hereditary nor did it confer ownership rights. The Jagirdar only had the right to collect the revenue from that land for a temporary period.","explanation_hi":"अभिकथन सत्य है; अधिकांश मनसबदार जागीरदार थे जिन्हें भू-राजस्व आवंटन के माध्यम से भुगतान किया जाता था। हालाँकि, कारण गलत है। जागीर न तो वंशानुगत थी और न ही इससे स्वामित्व का अधिकार मिलता था। जागीरदार को केवल एक अस्थायी अवधि के लिए उस भूमि से राजस्व एकत्र करने का अधिकार था।"},"799":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Diwan-i-Ala or Wazir was the chief finance minister of the Mughal Empire. He controlled the revenue department, supervised all income and expenditure, and oversaw the assignment of Jagirs.","explanation_hi":"दीवान-ए-आला या वज़ीर मुग़ल साम्राज्य का मुख्य वित्त मंत्री होता था। वह राजस्व विभाग को नियंत्रित करता था, सभी आय और व्यय की निगरानी करता था, और जागीरों के आवंटन की देखरेख करता था।"},"800":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct. Statement 2 is incorrect because in 'Khet Batai', the field was divided between the state and the peasant while the crop was still standing. Dividing the grain after threshing (separating from chaff) was known as 'Ras Batai' or 'Lang Batai'.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि 'खेत बटाई' में, राज्य और किसान के बीच खेत का बँटवारा तब होता था जब फसल खड़ी होती थी। थ्रेसिंग (भूसे से अलग करने) के बाद अनाज को बाँटने को 'रास बटाई' या 'लंग बटाई' के रूप में जाना जाता था।"}}