{"431":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Indo-Greeks (Bactrians) were the first to issue coins bearing the portraits and names of kings, making them historically identifiable. They were also the first to issue gold coins in India, a practice later adopted and expanded upon by the Kushans.","explanation_hi":"इंडो-ग्रीक (बैक्ट्रियन) पहले ऐसे शासक थे जिन्होंने राजाओं के चित्र और नाम वाले सिक्के जारी किए, जिससे उन्हें ऐतिहासिक रूप से पहचाना जा सका। वे भारत में सोने के सिक्के जारी करने वाले पहले शासक भी थे, जिस प्रथा को बाद में कुषाणों द्वारा अपनाया और विस्तारित किया गया।"},"432":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; Menander (Milinda) had his capital at Sakala. Statement 2 is incorrect because his famous philosophical debate was with the Buddhist monk Nagasena, not Ashvaghosha. This debate is recorded in the 'Milinda Panho' (Questions of Milinda).","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; मिनांडर (मिलिंद) की राजधानी साकल में थी। कथन 2 गलत है क्योंकि उनका प्रसिद्ध दार्शनिक वाद-विवाद बौद्ध भिक्षु नागसेन के साथ था, न कि अश्वघोष के साथ। यह वाद-विवाद 'मिलिंद पन्हो' (मिलिंद के प्रश्न) में दर्ज है।"},"433":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The correct chronological sequence of post-Mauryan foreign invasions is: Indo-Greeks (around 200 BC), followed by the Shakas (1st century BC), then the Parthians (late 1st century BC to 1st century AD), and finally the Kushans (1st century AD).","explanation_hi":"मौर्योत्तर विदेशी आक्रमणों का सही कालानुक्रमिक क्रम है: इंडो-ग्रीक (लगभग 200 ईसा पूर्व), उसके बाद शक (पहली शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व), फिर पार्थियन (पहली शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व के अंत से पहली शताब्दी ईस्वी), और अंत में कुषाण (पहली शताब्दी ईस्वी)।"},"434":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Menander was the most famous Indo-Greek king. Rudradaman I was a great Shaka ruler of Western India. Gondophernes was the most prominent Parthian (Pahlava) king. Kujula Kadphises was the founder of the Kushan empire in India.","explanation_hi":"मिनांडर सबसे प्रसिद्ध इंडो-ग्रीक राजा था। रुद्रदामन प्रथम पश्चिमी भारत का एक महान शक शासक था। गोंडोफर्नीज सबसे प्रमुख पार्थियन (पहलव) राजा था। कुजुल कडफिसेस भारत में कुषाण साम्राज्य का संस्थापक था।"},"435":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"St. Thomas is believed to have arrived in India (specifically the Malabar Coast and later Mylapore) during the first century AD in the reign of the Parthian king Gondophernes. The Takht-i-Bahi inscription mentions Gondophernes.","explanation_hi":"माना जाता है कि सेंट थॉमस पार्थियन राजा गोंडोफर्नीज के शासनकाल के दौरान पहली शताब्दी ईस्वी में भारत (विशेष रूप से मालाबार तट और बाद में मायलापुर) पहुंचे थे। तख्त-ए-बाही शिलालेख गोंडोफर्नीज का उल्लेख करता है।"},"436":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Assertion (A) is true; the Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman (c. 150 AD) is the earliest extensive inscription in classical Sanskrit. Reason (R) is false because the inscription was primarily issued to record the repair and restoration of the Sudarshana Lake (originally built by the Mauryas), not a victory over the Kushans.","explanation_hi":"कथन (A) सत्य है; रुद्रदामन का जूनागढ़ शिलालेख (लगभग 150 ई.) शास्त्रीय संस्कृत का सबसे प्रारंभिक विस्तृत शिलालेख है। कारण (R) गलत है क्योंकि यह शिलालेख मुख्य रूप से सुदर्शन झील (मूल रूप से मौर्यों द्वारा निर्मित) की मरम्मत और जीर्णोद्धार को दर्ज करने के लिए जारी किया गया था, न कि कुषाणों पर जीत के लिए।"},"437":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Kanishka convened the 4th Buddhist Council and controlled the lucrative Silk Route. Statement 3 is incorrect because Purushapura (modern Peshawar) was his primary capital. Mathura served as the secondary, eastern capital of his vast empire.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कनिष्क ने चौथी बौद्ध संगीति बुलाई और आकर्षक रेशम मार्ग (सिल्क रूट) को नियंत्रित किया। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि पुरुषपुर (आधुनिक पेशावर) उसकी प्राथमिक राजधानी थी। मथुरा उनके विशाल साम्राज्य की द्वितीयक, पूर्वी राजधानी के रूप में कार्य करता था।"},"438":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Shaka Era (78 CE) is historically attributed to the Kushan Emperor Kanishka to mark his ascension to the throne. It is called the 'Shaka Era' because it was used extensively by the Shaka Kshatrapas of Western India for a long time.","explanation_hi":"शक संवत् (78 ईस्वी) को ऐतिहासिक रूप से कुषाण सम्राट कनिष्क के सिंहासन पर चढ़ने को चिह्नित करने के लिए जिम्मेदार ठहराया गया है। इसे 'शक संवत्' कहा जाता है क्योंकि इसका उपयोग पश्चिमी भारत के शक क्षत्रपों द्वारा लंबे समय तक बड़े पैमाने पर किया गया था।"},"439":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"'Kshatrapa' (Satrap) was the provincial governor system of the Shakas/Parthians. 'Devaputra' (Son of God) was a title adopted by Kushans (influenced by Chinese titles). 'Yavanika' is the curtain used in Indian theater, derived from Greek (Yavana) influence. 'Strategoi' were Indo-Greek military governors.","explanation_hi":"'क्षत्रप' (सत्रप) शकों/पार्थियनों की प्रांतीय गवर्नर प्रणाली थी। 'देवपुत्र' कुषाणों द्वारा अपनाई गई एक उपाधि थी (चीनी उपाधियों से प्रभावित)। 'यवनिका' भारतीय रंगमंच में इस्तेमाल होने वाला पर्दा है, जो यूनानी (यवन) प्रभाव से लिया गया है। 'स्ट्रेटेगोई' इंडो-ग्रीक सैन्य गवर्नर थे।"},"440":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. The Kushans patronized both schools. Statement 3 is entirely incorrect; the Gandhara School is most famous for producing the earliest and most prolific anthropomorphic images of the Buddha, blending Greek physical features (like Apollo) with Buddhist iconography.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कुषाणों ने दोनों शैलियों को संरक्षण दिया। कथन 3 पूरी तरह से गलत है; गांधार शैली बुद्ध की सबसे प्रारंभिक और सबसे विपुल मानवशास्त्रीय (मानव रूप) मूर्तियों के निर्माण के लिए सबसे प्रसिद्ध है, जिसमें बौद्ध प्रतिमा विज्ञान के साथ यूनानी शारीरिक विशेषताओं (जैसे अपोलो) का सम्मिश्रण है।"},"441":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Option 3 is incorrect. The Shakas did not have a centralized democracy. They ruled through the 'Kshatrapa' (Satrap) system, which was a decentralized system of military governors acting under a Mahakshatrapa (Great Governor), following the Persian administrative model.","explanation_hi":"विकल्प 3 गलत है। शकों के पास केंद्रीकृत लोकतंत्र नहीं था। उन्होंने 'क्षत्रप' (सत्रप) प्रणाली के माध्यम से शासन किया, जो फारसी प्रशासनिक मॉडल का पालन करते हुए महाक्षत्रप (महान गवर्नर) के अधीन कार्य करने वाले सैन्य गवर्नरों की एक विकेन्द्रीकृत प्रणाली थी।"},"442":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Charaka was the court physician of the Kushan Emperor Kanishka. His work, the 'Charaka Samhita', is one of the most authoritative ancient texts on Ayurveda (Indian traditional medicine).","explanation_hi":"चरक कुषाण सम्राट कनिष्क के दरबारी चिकित्सक थे। उनका काम, 'चरक संहिता', आयुर्वेद (भारतीय पारंपरिक चिकित्सा) पर सबसे आधिकारिक प्राचीन ग्रंथों में से एक है।"},"443":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are true, and R explains A perfectly. Pliny the Elder (a Roman writer) lamented the massive drain of Roman gold to India to buy spices and silk. This influx of Roman gold, facilitated by controlling the Silk Route, allowed the Kushans to mint the purest gold coins in ancient India.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सत्य हैं, और R, A की पूरी तरह से व्याख्या करता है। प्लिनी द एल्डर (एक रोमन लेखक) ने मसाले और रेशम खरीदने के लिए भारत में रोमन सोने के बड़े पैमाने पर पलायन पर शोक व्यक्त किया। रेशम मार्ग को नियंत्रित करने से सुगम रोमन सोने की इस आमद ने कुषाणों को प्राचीन भारत में सबसे शुद्ध सोने के सिक्के ढालने की अनुमति दी।"},"444":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Kujula Kadphises (Kadphises I) founded the empire. He was succeeded by his son Vima Kadphises (Kadphises II), who issued a large number of gold coins. Kanishka succeeded Vima, bringing the empire to its zenith. Huvishka was one of Kanishka's prominent successors. Sequence: 3-1-2-4.","explanation_hi":"कुजुल कडफिसेस (कडफिसेस प्रथम) ने साम्राज्य की स्थापना की। उसके बाद उसका पुत्र विम कडफिसेस (कडफिसेस द्वितीय) उत्तराधिकारी बना, जिसने बड़ी संख्या में सोने के सिक्के जारी किए। कनिष्क विम का उत्तराधिकारी बना, जो साम्राज्य को उसके चरम पर ले गया। हुविष्क कनिष्क के प्रमुख उत्तराधिकारियों में से एक था। क्रम: 3-1-2-4।"},"445":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Indian astronomy and astrology (Jyotisha) were heavily influenced by the Greeks. The term 'Hora' (horoscope), the naming of the planets, and the concept of a seven-day week were borrowed from Greek astronomy. The ancient Indian text 'Romaka Siddhanta' is directly based on Greek astronomical principles.","explanation_hi":"भारतीय खगोल विज्ञान और ज्योतिष यूनानियों से काफी प्रभावित थे। 'होरा' (कुंडली) शब्द, ग्रहों का नामकरण और सात-दिवसीय सप्ताह की अवधारणा यूनानी खगोल विज्ञान से उधार ली गई थी। प्राचीन भारतीय ग्रंथ 'रोमक सिद्धांत' सीधे यूनानी खगोलीय सिद्धांतों पर आधारित है।"}}