{"446":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"According to the Puranas, the Satavahana dynasty was founded by Simuka, who assassinated the last Kanva king, Susharman, in the 1st century BC and destroyed the Shunga power, establishing a vast empire in the Deccan.","explanation_hi":"पुराणों के अनुसार, सातवाहन वंश की स्थापना सिमुक ने की थी, जिसने पहली शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व में अंतिम कण्व राजा सुशर्मन की हत्या कर दी थी और शुंग सत्ता को नष्ट कर दक्कन में एक विशाल साम्राज्य की स्थापना की थी।"},"447":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Gautamiputra Satakarni revived the Satavahana power. The Nashik prashasti by his mother calls him the destroyer of Shakas, Pahlavas, and Yavanas. It explicitly titles him 'Ekabrahmana' and the destroyer of Kshatriya arrogance.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। गौतमीपुत्र शातकर्णी ने सातवाहन सत्ता को पुनर्जीवित किया। उनकी माता द्वारा रचित नासिक प्रशस्ति उन्हें शक, पहलव और यवनों का नाशक कहती है। यह स्पष्ट रूप से उन्हें 'एकब्राह्मण' और क्षत्रिय अहंकार का नाशक बताती है।"},"448":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"King Hala authored 'Gatha Saptashati' in Prakrit. Simuka founded the dynasty. Gautamiputra Satakarni famously defeated Nahapana. Yajna Sri Satakarni, a lover of trade and navigation, issued coins with ship and anchor motifs indicating maritime power.","explanation_hi":"राजा हाल ने प्राकृत में 'गाथा सप्तशती' की रचना की। सिमुक ने राजवंश की स्थापना की। गौतमीपुत्र शातकर्णी ने नहपान को हराया। व्यापार और नौवहन के प्रेमी, यज्ञ श्री शातकर्णी ने समुद्री शक्ति को दर्शाने वाले जहाज और लंगर के रूपांकनों वाले सिक्के जारी किए।"},"449":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Satavahanas predominantly used Prakrit as their official language, written in the Brahmi script. Unlike the later Guptas who championed Sanskrit, the Satavahanas patronized Prakrit, as seen in texts like Gatha Saptashati and all their major inscriptions.","explanation_hi":"सातवाहनों ने मुख्य रूप से ब्राह्मी लिपि में लिखी गई प्राकृत को अपनी आधिकारिक भाषा के रूप में इस्तेमाल किया। बाद के गुप्तों के विपरीत, जिन्होंने संस्कृत का समर्थन किया, सातवाहनों ने प्राकृत को संरक्षण दिया, जैसा कि गाथा सप्तशती जैसे ग्रंथों और उनके सभी प्रमुख शिलालेखों में देखा गया है।"},"450":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are true. The practice of giving tax-free land grants (Agrahara) began with the Satavahanas. The Naneghat inscription of Naganika (wife of Satakarni I) is the earliest epigraphic evidence of villages being granted for Vedic sacrifices.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सत्य हैं। कर-मुक्त भूमि अनुदान (अग्रहार) देने की प्रथा सातवाहनों के साथ शुरू हुई। नागनिका (शातकर्णी प्रथम की पत्नी) का नानेघाट शिलालेख वैदिक यज्ञों के लिए दिए जा रहे गांवों का सबसे पहला पुरालेखीय प्रमाण है।"},"451":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. While the prominent use of mother's names (matronymics) indicates a respected status for women and possibly surviving matrilineal traces, the throne always passed down the male line (patrilineal succession).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। जबकि माँ के नाम (मातृनामों) का प्रमुख उपयोग महिलाओं के लिए एक सम्मानित स्थिति और संभवतः जीवित मातृसत्तात्मक निशानों को इंगित करता है, सिंहासन हमेशा पुरुष रेखा (पितृसत्तात्मक उत्तराधिकार) से ही नीचे जाता था।"},"452":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The primary capital of the Satavahanas was Pratishthana (modern Paithan) situated on the banks of the Godavari river in the Aurangabad district of Maharashtra. Later, Amaravati (Dhanyakataka) also became an important eastern center.","explanation_hi":"सातवाहनों की प्राथमिक राजधानी महाराष्ट्र के औरंगाबाद जिले में गोदावरी नदी के तट पर स्थित प्रतिष्ठान (आधुनिक पैठण) थी। बाद में, अमरावती (धन्यकटक) भी एक महत्वपूर्ण पूर्वी केंद्र बन गया।"},"453":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The correct chronological sequence is: Simuka (the founder), followed by early powerful king Satakarni I, then much later Gautamiputra Satakarni (who revived the empire), and towards the decline, Yajna Sri Satakarni. Hence, 2-4-1-3.","explanation_hi":"सही कालानुक्रमिक क्रम है: सिमुक (संस्थापक), उसके बाद प्रारंभिक शक्तिशाली राजा शातकर्णी प्रथम, फिर बहुत बाद में गौतमीपुत्र शातकर्णी (जिसने साम्राज्य को पुनर्जीवित किया), और पतन की ओर, यज्ञ श्री शातकर्णी। अतः, 2-4-1-3।"},"454":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Satavahanas did not issue gold coins like the Kushans. They primarily issued a massive quantity of coins made of Lead, as well as potin (an alloy), copper, and bronze, reflecting the robust internal trade in the Deccan.","explanation_hi":"सातवाहनों ने कुषाणों की तरह सोने के सिक्के जारी नहीं किए। उन्होंने मुख्य रूप से सीसे के साथ-साथ पोटिन (एक मिश्र धातु), तांबे और कांसे से बने भारी मात्रा में सिक्के जारी किए, जो दक्कन में मजबूत आंतरिक व्यापार को दर्शाते हैं।"},"455":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are correct. The Satavahanas greatly benefited from the Indo-Roman trade. Spices, textiles, and precious stones were exported through bustling western ports like Bharuch, Sopara, and Kalyan in exchange for Roman gold, as attested by the 'Periplus of the Erythraean Sea'.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं। सातवाहनों को भारत-रोमन व्यापार से बहुत लाभ हुआ। भरूच, सोपारा और कल्याण जैसे हलचल वाले पश्चिमी बंदरगाहों के माध्यम से रोमन सोने के बदले मसालों, वस्त्रों और कीमती पत्थरों का निर्यात किया जाता था, जैसा कि 'एरीथ्रियन सागर के पेरिप्लस' द्वारा प्रमाणित किया गया है।"},"456":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"According to the Puranas, the Satavahana dynasty was founded by Simuka, who assassinated the last Kanva king, Susharman, in the 1st century BC and destroyed the Shunga power, establishing a vast empire in the Deccan.","explanation_hi":"पुराणों के अनुसार, सातवाहन वंश की स्थापना सिमुक ने की थी, जिसने पहली शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व में अंतिम कण्व राजा सुशर्मन की हत्या कर दी थी और शुंग सत्ता को नष्ट कर दक्कन में एक विशाल साम्राज्य की स्थापना की थी।"},"457":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Gautamiputra Satakarni revived the Satavahana power. The Nashik prashasti by his mother calls him the destroyer of Shakas, Pahlavas, and Yavanas. It explicitly titles him 'Ekabrahmana' and the destroyer of Kshatriya arrogance.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। गौतमीपुत्र शातकर्णी ने सातवाहन सत्ता को पुनर्जीवित किया। उनकी माता द्वारा रचित नासिक प्रशस्ति उन्हें शक, पहलव और यवनों का नाशक कहती है। यह स्पष्ट रूप से उन्हें 'एकब्राह्मण' और क्षत्रिय अहंकार का नाशक बताती है।"},"458":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"King Hala authored 'Gatha Saptashati' in Prakrit. Simuka founded the dynasty. Gautamiputra Satakarni famously defeated Nahapana. Yajna Sri Satakarni, a lover of trade and navigation, issued coins with ship and anchor motifs indicating maritime power.","explanation_hi":"राजा हाल ने प्राकृत में 'गाथा सप्तशती' की रचना की। सिमुक ने राजवंश की स्थापना की। गौतमीपुत्र शातकर्णी ने नहपान को हराया। व्यापार और नौवहन के प्रेमी, यज्ञ श्री शातकर्णी ने समुद्री शक्ति को दर्शाने वाले जहाज और लंगर के रूपांकनों वाले सिक्के जारी किए।"},"459":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Satavahanas predominantly used Prakrit as their official language, written in the Brahmi script. Unlike the later Guptas who championed Sanskrit, the Satavahanas patronized Prakrit, as seen in texts like Gatha Saptashati and all their major inscriptions.","explanation_hi":"सातवाहनों ने मुख्य रूप से ब्राह्मी लिपि में लिखी गई प्राकृत को अपनी आधिकारिक भाषा के रूप में इस्तेमाल किया। बाद के गुप्तों के विपरीत, जिन्होंने संस्कृत का समर्थन किया, सातवाहनों ने प्राकृत को संरक्षण दिया, जैसा कि गाथा सप्तशती जैसे ग्रंथों और उनके सभी प्रमुख शिलालेखों में देखा गया है।"},"460":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are true. The practice of giving tax-free land grants (Agrahara) began with the Satavahanas. The Naneghat inscription of Naganika (wife of Satakarni I) is the earliest epigraphic evidence of villages being granted for Vedic sacrifices.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सत्य हैं। कर-मुक्त भूमि अनुदान (अग्रहार) देने की प्रथा सातवाहनों के साथ शुरू हुई। नागनिका (शातकर्णी प्रथम की पत्नी) का नानेघाट शिलालेख वैदिक यज्ञों के लिए दिए जा रहे गांवों का सबसे पहला पुरालेखीय प्रमाण है।"},"461":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. While the prominent use of mother's names (matronymics) indicates a respected status for women and possibly surviving matrilineal traces, the throne always passed down the male line (patrilineal succession).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। जबकि माँ के नाम (मातृनामों) का प्रमुख उपयोग महिलाओं के लिए एक सम्मानित स्थिति और संभवतः जीवित मातृसत्तात्मक निशानों को इंगित करता है, सिंहासन हमेशा पुरुष रेखा (पितृसत्तात्मक उत्तराधिकार) से ही नीचे जाता था।"},"462":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The primary capital of the Satavahanas was Pratishthana (modern Paithan) situated on the banks of the Godavari river in the Aurangabad district of Maharashtra. Later, Amaravati (Dhanyakataka) also became an important eastern center.","explanation_hi":"सातवाहनों की प्राथमिक राजधानी महाराष्ट्र के औरंगाबाद जिले में गोदावरी नदी के तट पर स्थित प्रतिष्ठान (आधुनिक पैठण) थी। बाद में, अमरावती (धन्यकटक) भी एक महत्वपूर्ण पूर्वी केंद्र बन गया।"},"463":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The correct chronological sequence is: Simuka (the founder), followed by early powerful king Satakarni I, then much later Gautamiputra Satakarni (who revived the empire), and towards the decline, Yajna Sri Satakarni. Hence, 2-4-1-3.","explanation_hi":"सही कालानुक्रमिक क्रम है: सिमुक (संस्थापक), उसके बाद प्रारंभिक शक्तिशाली राजा शातकर्णी प्रथम, फिर बहुत बाद में गौतमीपुत्र शातकर्णी (जिसने साम्राज्य को पुनर्जीवित किया), और पतन की ओर, यज्ञ श्री शातकर्णी। अतः, 2-4-1-3।"},"464":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Satavahanas did not issue gold coins like the Kushans. They primarily issued a massive quantity of coins made of Lead, as well as potin (an alloy), copper, and bronze, reflecting the robust internal trade in the Deccan.","explanation_hi":"सातवाहनों ने कुषाणों की तरह सोने के सिक्के जारी नहीं किए। उन्होंने मुख्य रूप से सीसे के साथ-साथ पोटिन (एक मिश्र धातु), तांबे और कांसे से बने भारी मात्रा में सिक्के जारी किए, जो दक्कन में मजबूत आंतरिक व्यापार को दर्शाते हैं।"},"465":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are correct. The Satavahanas greatly benefited from the Indo-Roman trade. Spices, textiles, and precious stones were exported through bustling western ports like Bharuch, Sopara, and Kalyan in exchange for Roman gold, as attested by the 'Periplus of the Erythraean Sea'.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं। सातवाहनों को भारत-रोमन व्यापार से बहुत लाभ हुआ। भरूच, सोपारा और कल्याण जैसे हलचल वाले पश्चिमी बंदरगाहों के माध्यम से रोमन सोने के बदले मसालों, वस्त्रों और कीमती पत्थरों का निर्यात किया जाता था, जैसा कि 'एरीथ्रियन सागर के पेरिप्लस' द्वारा प्रमाणित किया गया है।"}}