{"601":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Korkai, situated on the Gulf of Mannar, was the chief port and early capital of the Pandya kingdom. It was internationally famous for its abundant and high-quality pearl fisheries.","explanation_hi":"मन्नार की खाड़ी पर स्थित कोरकई, पांड्य साम्राज्य का प्रमुख बंदरगाह और प्रारंभिक राजधानी थी। यह अपने प्रचुर और उच्च गुणवत्ता वाले मोती मत्स्य पालन के लिए अंतरराष्ट्रीय स्तर पर प्रसिद्ध था।"},"602":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"'Padirruppattu' is a Sangam literary work that exclusively deals with the Chera dynasty. It provides valuable historical genealogies and details the military exploits of various Chera kings.","explanation_hi":"'पतिरुप्पत्तु' एक संगम साहित्यिक कृति है जो विशेष रूप से चेर राजवंश से संबंधित है। यह मूल्यवान ऐतिहासिक वंशावली प्रदान करता है और विभिन्न चेर राजाओं के सैन्य कारनामों का विवरण देता है।"},"603":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are true. Megasthenes, the Greek ambassador to Chandragupta Maurya, wrote about 'Pandaia' (the Pandya kingdom) being ruled by the daughter of Heracles and its association with pearls.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सत्य हैं। चन्द्रगुप्त मौर्य के दरबार में यूनानी राजदूत मेगस्थनीज ने 'पांड्या' (पांड्य साम्राज्य) के बारे में लिखा था कि यहाँ हेराक्लेस की बेटी का शासन था और यह मोतियों से जुड़ा था।"},"604":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The royal emblem of the Pandyas was the Fish (often depicted as Twin Fishes). The Tiger was the emblem of the Cholas, and the Bow and Arrow belonged to the Cheras.","explanation_hi":"पांड्यों का शाही प्रतीक मछली (अक्सर जुड़वां मछलियों के रूप में दर्शाया गया) था। बाघ चोलों का प्रतीक था, और धनुष-बाण चेरों का था।"},"605":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both A and R are true, and R perfectly explains A. The immense scale of Indo-Roman trade in the Chera region led to the establishment of a Roman settlement and a temple dedicated to Augustus at Muziris.","explanation_hi":"A और R दोनों सत्य हैं, और R, A की पूरी तरह से व्याख्या करता है। चेर क्षेत्र में भारत-रोमन व्यापार के विशाल पैमाने ने मुज़िरिस में एक रोमन बस्ती और ऑगस्टस को समर्पित एक मंदिर की स्थापना का नेतृत्व किया।"},"606":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Cheran Senguttuvan (the Red Chera) is highly celebrated in the epic Silappadikaram. He brought a stone from the Himalayas to carve the idol of Kannagi, thus inaugurating the Pattini cult (Goddess of Chastity).","explanation_hi":"महाकाव्य शिलप्पादिकारम में चेरन सेनगुट्टुवन (लाल चेर) की अत्यधिक प्रशंसा की गई है। वह कण्णगी की मूर्ति तराशने के लिए हिमालय से एक पत्थर लाया था, इस प्रकार उसने पत्तिनी पंथ (सतीत्व की देवी) का उद्घाटन किया।"},"607":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Marco Polo visited the Coromandel coast (Kayal port) during the reign of the Pandyan king Maravarman Kulasekara I. He described the Pandya kingdom as the richest and most splendid province in the world.","explanation_hi":"मार्को पोलो ने पांड्य राजा मारवर्मन कुलशेखर प्रथम के शासनकाल के दौरान कोरोमंडल तट (कायल बंदरगाह) का दौरा किया था। उन्होंने पांड्य साम्राज्य को दुनिया का सबसे अमीर और सबसे शानदार प्रांत बताया।"},"608":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I (c. 1251–1268) was the greatest ruler of the Second Pandyan Empire. His vast conquests brought immense wealth, which he used to gild the temples at Chidambaram and Srirangam.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। जटावर्मन सुंदर पांड्य प्रथम (लगभग 1251-1268) द्वितीय पांड्य साम्राज्य का सबसे महान शासक था। उसकी विशाल विजय से अपार धन प्राप्त हुआ, जिसका उपयोग उसने चिदंबरम और श्रीरंगम के मंदिरों पर सोना मढ़ने के लिए किया।"},"609":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Nedunjeliyan won the Talaiyalanganam battle. Kadungon ended the Kalabhra interregnum (late 6th C). Udayanjeral is the earliest known Chera. Maravarman Sundara Pandya I laid the foundation of the Second Pandyan Empire (13th C).","explanation_hi":"नेदुनजेलियन ने तलैयालंगानम का युद्ध जीता। कडुंगोन ने कलभ्र अंतराल (6वीं शताब्दी के अंत) को समाप्त कर दिया। उदयनजेरल सबसे पहला ज्ञात चेर है। मारवर्मन सुंदर पांड्य प्रथम ने द्वितीय पांड्य साम्राज्य (13वीं सदी) की नींव रखी।"},"610":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Option 4 is the correct answer. The title 'Sembiyan' was exclusively used by the Chola kings. The Pandyas used titles like Minavan (fisher), Panchavan, and Tennavan (southerner).","explanation_hi":"विकल्प 4 सही उत्तर है। 'सेंबियन' उपाधि का उपयोग विशेष रूप से चोल राजाओं द्वारा किया जाता था। पांड्यों ने मीनवन (मछुआरा), पंचवन और तेन्नवन (दक्षिणवासी) जैसी उपाधियों का उपयोग किया।"},"611":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The ancient Chera kingdom extended over the Malabar Coast, comprising the modern state of Kerala and the Kongu Nadu region (Coimbatore, Karur, Salem) in western Tamil Nadu.","explanation_hi":"प्राचीन चेर साम्राज्य मालाबार तट तक फैला हुआ था, जिसमें आधुनिक केरल राज्य और पश्चिमी तमिलनाडु में कोंगु नाडु क्षेत्र (कोयंबटूर, करूर, सलेम) शामिल थे।"},"612":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Chronology: Nedunjeliyan belongs to the Sangam Age (early centuries CE). Then came the dark Kalabhra interregnum (c. 3rd–6th century). Kadungon revived Pandya power (late 6th C). The Second Pandyan Empire arose in the 13th century.","explanation_hi":"कालक्रम: नेदुनजेलियन संगम युग (ईस्वी की प्रारंभिक सदियों) से संबंधित हैं। फिर अंधकारमय कलभ्र अंतराल (लगभग तीसरी-छठी शताब्दी) आया। कडुंगोन ने पांड्य शक्ति को पुनर्जीवित किया (6वीं सदी का अंत)। द्वितीय पांड्य साम्राज्य 13वीं शताब्दी में उत्पन्न हुआ।"},"613":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. 'Maduraikkanchi', part of the Pattuppattu (Ten Idylls), is a crucial literary source that gives a lengthy and detailed account of the socio-economic life in Madurai during the reign of Nedunjeliyan.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। 'मदुरैकांचि', पत्तुप्पाट्टु (दस गीत) का हिस्सा, एक महत्वपूर्ण साहित्यिक स्रोत है जो नेदुनजेलियन के शासनकाल के दौरान मदुरै में सामाजिक-आर्थिक जीवन का एक लंबा और विस्तृत विवरण देता है।"},"614":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both A and R are true, and R explains A. The Pandyan civil war in 1310 CE allowed Alauddin Khalji's general, Malik Kafur, to intervene, sack Madurai in 1311 CE, and effectively bring an end to Pandya dominance in the South.","explanation_hi":"A और R दोनों सत्य हैं, और R, A की व्याख्या करता है। 1310 ई. में पांड्य गृहयुद्ध ने अलाउद्दीन खिलजी के सेनापति मलिक काफूर को हस्तक्षेप करने, 1311 ई. में मदुरै को लूटने और दक्षिण में पांड्य प्रभुत्व को प्रभावी ढंग से समाप्त करने की अनुमति दी।"},"615":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Muziris (widely identified with the modern archaeological site of Pattanam in Kerala) was a premier Chera port. Excavations here have yielded substantial Roman antiquities, proving a massive influx of Roman wealth in exchange for pepper.","explanation_hi":"मुज़िरिस (व्यापक रूप से केरल में पट्टनम के आधुनिक पुरातात्विक स्थल के साथ पहचाना गया) एक प्रमुख चेर बंदरगाह था। यहाँ की खुदाई में पर्याप्त रोमन पुरावशेष मिले हैं, जो काली मिर्च के बदले रोमन धन की भारी आमद को साबित करते हैं।"}}