{"421":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Pushyamitra Shunga, who was the commander-in-chief (Senapati) of the Mauryan army, assassinated the last Mauryan king Brihadratha during a military parade and established the Shunga dynasty in Magadha.","explanation_hi":"मौर्य सेना के सेनापति पुष्यमित्र शुंग ने एक सैन्य परेड के दौरान अंतिम मौर्य राजा बृहद्रथ की हत्या कर दी और मगध में शुंग वंश की स्थापना की।"},"422":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The Ayodhya stone inscription of local governor Dhanadeva confirms that his ancestor Pushyamitra performed two Ashvamedha sacrifices. Patanjali, the author of 'Mahabhashya', was his contemporary and chief priest.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। स्थानीय गवर्नर धनदेव का अयोध्या प्रस्तर शिलालेख पुष्टि करता है कि उनके पूर्वज पुष्यमित्र ने दो अश्वमेध यज्ञ किए थे। 'महाभाष्य' के लेखक पतंजलि उनके समकालीन और मुख्य पुजारी थे।"},"423":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Heliodorus, the Greek ambassador of Indo-Greek King Antialcidas, erected the Garuda Pillar at Vidisha in honor of Lord Vasudeva (Vishnu). The inscription refers to Heliodorus as a 'Bhagavata', showing the spread of Vaishnavism among Greeks.","explanation_hi":"इंडो-ग्रीक राजा एंटियालकीदास के यूनानी राजदूत हेलियोडोरस ने भगवान वासुदेव (विष्णु) के सम्मान में विदिशा में गरुड़ स्तंभ बनवाया था। शिलालेख में हेलियोडोरस को 'भागवत' कहा गया है, जो यूनानियों के बीच वैष्णव धर्म के प्रसार को दर्शाता है।"},"424":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"'Malavikagnimitram' is a play by Kalidasa featuring Agnimitra (Pushyamitra's son) as the hero. 'Mahabhashya' was written by the grammarian Patanjali. The Ayodhya Inscription, which mentions the Ashvamedha sacrifices, was issued by Dhanadeva.","explanation_hi":"'मालविकाग्निमित्रम' कालिदास का एक नाटक है जिसमें अग्निमित्र (पुष्यमित्र के पुत्र) को नायक के रूप में दिखाया गया है। 'महाभाष्य' वैयाकरण पतंजलि द्वारा लिखा गया था। अश्वमेध यज्ञों का उल्लेख करने वाला अयोध्या शिलालेख धनदेव द्वारा जारी किया गया था।"},"425":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Around 73 BC, the Shunga dynasty was overthrown when its last ruler, the weak and profligate Devabhuti, was assassinated by his Brahmana minister Vasudeva Kanva, who then established the Kanva dynasty.","explanation_hi":"लगभग 73 ईसा पूर्व में, शुंग वंश को उखाड़ फेंका गया जब इसके अंतिम शासक, कमजोर और विलासी देवभूति की उसके ब्राह्मण मंत्री वासुदेव कण्व ने हत्या कर दी, जिसने फिर कण्व वंश की स्थापना की।"},"426":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are correct, and R validates A. While Buddhist texts portray Pushyamitra as an enemy who destroyed stupas, archaeological evidence shows that merchants and donors lavishly expanded and decorated major Buddhist stupas (Bharhut and Sanchi) with stone enclosures during the Shunga era.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं, और R, A की पुष्टि करता है। जबकि बौद्ध ग्रंथ पुष्यमित्र को एक दुश्मन के रूप में चित्रित करते हैं जिसने स्तूपों को नष्ट कर दिया, पुरातात्विक साक्ष्य बताते हैं कि व्यापारियों और दाताओं ने शुंग काल के दौरान पत्थर के बाड़ों के साथ प्रमुख बौद्ध स्तूपों (भरहुत और सांची) का भव्य रूप से विस्तार और सजावट की।"},"427":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Option 3 is incorrect. The Shunga dynasty actually marked a strong revival of Brahmanism and Vedic rituals (like the Ashvamedha sacrifice) after the pro-Buddhist policies of the later Mauryas. They did not suppress Brahmanism; they were Brahmanas themselves.","explanation_hi":"विकल्प 3 गलत है। शुंग वंश ने वास्तव में उत्तरकालीन मौर्यों की बौद्ध समर्थक नीतियों के बाद ब्राह्मणवाद और वैदिक कर्मकांडों (जैसे अश्वमेध यज्ञ) के एक मजबूत पुनरुद्धार को चिह्नित किया। उन्होंने ब्राह्मणवाद को नहीं दबाया; वे स्वयं ब्राह्मण थे।"},"428":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; Vasudeva Kanva was a Brahmana minister who usurped the throne. Statement 2 is incorrect; the Kanva dynasty ruled for a brief period (approx 45 years) and their last king, Susharman, was overthrown by the Satavahanas (Andhras), not the Kushanas.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; वासुदेव कण्व एक ब्राह्मण मंत्री थे जिन्होंने सिंहासन हड़प लिया था। कथन 2 गलत है; कण्व वंश ने एक संक्षिप्त अवधि (लगभग 45 वर्ष) के लिए शासन किया और उनके अंतिम राजा, सुशर्मन को सातवाहनों (आंध्र) द्वारा उखाड़ फेंका गया था, कुषाणों द्वारा नहीं।"},"429":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The correct sequence is Brihadratha (the last Mauryan king), followed by his assassin Pushyamitra Shunga (founder of the Shunga dynasty), followed by his son Agnimitra (2nd Shunga king). Later, the Shunga dynasty was ended by Vasudeva Kanva (founder of the Kanva dynasty).","explanation_hi":"सही क्रम बृहद्रथ (अंतिम मौर्य राजा) है, उसके बाद उसका हत्यारा पुष्यमित्र शुंग (शुंग वंश का संस्थापक), उसके बाद उसका पुत्र अग्निमित्र (दूसरा शुंग राजा) है। बाद में, शुंग वंश को वासुदेव कण्व (कण्व वंश के संस्थापक) द्वारा समाप्त कर दिया गया था।"},"430":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The Besnagar (Vidisha) inscription clearly records that Heliodorus, an ambassador of King Antialcidas of Taxila, came to the court of King Bhagabhadra (identified as the 9th Shunga king or a local ruler belonging to the Shunga line).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। बेसनगर (विदिशा) शिलालेख स्पष्ट रूप से दर्ज करता है कि तक्षशिला के राजा एंटियालकीदास का एक राजदूत हेलियोडोरस, राजा भागभद्र (9वें शुंग राजा या शुंग वंश से संबंधित स्थानीय शासक के रूप में पहचाना गया) के दरबार में आया था।"}}