{"206":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"At the age of 42, after 12 years of severe asceticism, Mahavira attained Kevalya (omniscience) under a Sal tree on the banks of the Rijupalika river near Jrimbhikagrama. The Niranjana river is associated with Gautama Buddha's enlightenment.","explanation_hi":"42 वर्ष की आयु में, 12 वर्षों की कठोर तपस्या के बाद, महावीर ने जृम्भिकग्राम के पास ऋजुपालिका नदी के तट पर एक साल के पेड़ के नीचे कैवल्य (सर्वज्ञता) प्राप्त किया। निरंजना नदी गौतम बुद्ध के ज्ञानोदय से जुड़ी है।"},"207":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The first four vows are Ahimsa (non-violence), Satya (truth), Asteya (non-stealing), and Aparigraha (non-possession), given by Parshvanatha. Mahavira added Brahmacharya (celibacy) as the fifth vow.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। पहले चार व्रत अहिंसा, सत्य, अस्तेय (चोरी न करना) और अपरिग्रह (संपत्ति न रखना) हैं, जो पार्श्वनाथ द्वारा दिए गए थे। महावीर ने पांचवें व्रत के रूप में ब्रह्मचर्य को जोड़ा था।"},"208":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Rishabhanatha (1st) is associated with the Bull, Ajitanatha (2nd) with the Elephant, Parshvanatha (23rd) with the Serpent, and Mahavira (24th) with the Lion. These symbols help in identifying the Tirthankaras in Jain iconography.","explanation_hi":"ऋषभनाथ (प्रथम) का संबंध वृषभ (बैल) से है, अजितनाथ (दूसरे) का हाथी से, पार्श्वनाथ (23वें) का सर्प से, और महावीर (24वें) का सिंह से है। ये प्रतीक जैन प्रतिमा विज्ञान में तीर्थंकरों की पहचान करने में मदद करते हैं।"},"209":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Anekantavada (theory of many-sidedness) is a core Jain philosophy stating that truth and reality are perceived differently from diverse points of view, and no single point of view is the complete truth. Syadvada (theory of conditioned predication) is its logical expression.","explanation_hi":"अनेकांतवाद जैन धर्म का एक मुख्य दर्शन है जो बताता है कि सत्य और वास्तविकता को विभिन्न दृष्टिकोणों से अलग-अलग माना जाता है, और कोई भी एक दृष्टिकोण पूर्ण सत्य नहीं है। स्याद्वाद इसकी तार्किक अभिव्यक्ति है।"},"210":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"During the 12-year famine in Magadha, Bhadrabahu led a group of monks to South India (Karnataka) to maintain strict ascetic practices, including nudity. They later became the Digambara sect. Sthulabhadra stayed in Magadha and his followers became the Shvetambaras.","explanation_hi":"मगध में 12 साल के अकाल के दौरान, भद्रबाहु नग्नता सहित कठोर तपस्वी प्रथाओं को बनाए रखने के लिए भिक्षुओं के एक समूह को दक्षिण भारत (कर्नाटक) ले गए। वे बाद में दिगंबर संप्रदाय बन गए। स्थूलभद्र मगध में ही रहे और उनके अनुयायी श्वेतांबर बन गए।"},"211":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Kalpa Sutra was authored by Bhadrabahu, not Sthulabhadra. It contains the biographies of Jain Tirthankaras, particularly Parshvanatha and Mahavira, and is highly revered, especially among the Shvetambara sect during Paryushan.","explanation_hi":"कल्पसूत्र की रचना भद्रबाहु ने की थी, न कि स्थूलभद्र ने। इसमें जैन तीर्थंकरों, विशेष रूप से पार्श्वनाथ और महावीर की आत्मकथाएँ हैं, और इसे विशेष रूप से पर्यूषण के दौरान श्वेतांबर संप्रदाय के बीच अत्यधिक पूजनीय माना जाता है।"},"212":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Digambaras argue women must be reborn as men to attain Kevalya, and they believe Mallinatha was male. Statement 3 is incorrect because Digambaras rejected the 12 Angas compiled at Pataliputra, claiming the original Purvas were completely lost.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। दिगंबरों का तर्क है कि कैवल्य प्राप्त करने के लिए महिलाओं को पुरुषों के रूप में पुनर्जन्म लेना चाहिए, और वे मानते हैं कि मल्लिनाथ पुरुष थे। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि दिगंबरों ने पाटलिपुत्र में संकलित 12 अंगों को यह कहते हुए खारिज कर दिया था कि मूल पूर्व पूरी तरह से खो गए थे।"},"213":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are true. The First Council at Pataliputra (3rd century BC) was headed by Sthulabhadra to compile the 12 Angas. The Second Council at Valabhi (512 CE) finalized the written compilation of Jain scriptures (Agamas).","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सत्य हैं। पाटलिपुत्र (तीसरी शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व) में प्रथम संगीति का नेतृत्व 12 अंगों को संकलित करने के लिए स्थूलभद्र ने किया था। वल्लभी (512 ईस्वी) में द्वितीय संगीति ने जैन धर्मग्रंथों (आगमों) के लिखित संकलन को अंतिम रूप दिया।"},"214":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In Jain philosophy, Asrava is the influx of karma. Bandha is the bondage of soul by karma. Samvara is stopping new karmic influx through right conduct. Nirjara is the shedding of past accumulated karmas through penance, leading eventually to Moksha.","explanation_hi":"जैन दर्शन में, आस्रव कर्मों का प्रवाह है। बंध कर्म द्वारा आत्मा का बंधन है। संवर सम्यक आचरण के माध्यम से नए कर्म प्रवाह को रोकना है। निर्जरा तपस्या के माध्यम से पिछले संचित कर्मों का क्षय है, जो अंततः मोक्ष की ओर ले जाता है।"},"215":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"Pushyamitra Shunga was a staunch follower of Brahmanism and is widely recorded in Buddhist texts as a persecutor of heterodox sects, destroying stupas and monasteries. Kharavela (Kalinga), Chandragupta Maurya, and Amoghavarsha were famous royal patrons of Jainism.","explanation_hi":"पुष्यमित्र शुंग ब्राह्मणवाद का कट्टर अनुयायी था और बौद्ध ग्रंथों में उसे नास्तिक संप्रदायों के उत्पीड़क के रूप में दर्ज किया गया है, जिसने स्तूपों और मठों को नष्ट कर दिया था। खारवेल (कलिंग), चंद्रगुप्त मौर्य और अमोघवर्ष जैन धर्म के प्रसिद्ध शाही संरक्षक थे।"},"216":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The Sthanakvasi sect emerged from Shvetambaras and believes in praying in 'Sthanaks' rather than temples, strictly avoiding idol worship. The Yapaniya sect (now extinct) followed Digambara nudity but accepted Shvetambara texts and the possibility of women's salvation.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। स्थानकवासी संप्रदाय श्वेतांबरों से उभरा और मंदिरों के बजाय 'स्थानकों' में प्रार्थना करने में विश्वास करता है, मूर्ति पूजा से सख्ती से बचता है। यापनीय संप्रदाय (अब विलुप्त) ने दिगंबर नग्नता का पालन किया लेकिन श्वेतांबर ग्रंथों और महिलाओं के मोक्ष की संभावना को स्वीकार किया।"},"217":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Parshvanatha, the 23rd Tirthankara who lived about 250 years before Mahavira, was born in Varanasi (Kashi). He was the son of King Ashvasena of the Ikshvaku dynasty. He gave the first four Mahavratas of Jainism.","explanation_hi":"महावीर से लगभग 250 वर्ष पूर्व हुए 23वें तीर्थंकर पार्श्वनाथ का जन्म वाराणसी (काशी) में हुआ था। वे इक्ष्वाकु वंश के राजा अश्वसेन के पुत्र थे। उन्होंने जैन धर्म के पहले चार महाव्रत दिए।"},"218":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"'Samyak Smriti' (Right Mindfulness) is a part of the Buddhist Eightfold Path (Ashtangika Marg), not Jainism. The Triratna of Jainism consists of Right Faith (Darshana), Right Knowledge (Jnana), and Right Conduct (Charitra), which together lead to liberation.","explanation_hi":"'सम्यक् स्मृति' बौद्ध अष्टांगिक मार्ग का हिस्सा है, जैन धर्म का नहीं। जैन धर्म के त्रिरत्न में सम्यक् दर्शन, सम्यक् ज्ञान और सम्यक् चरित्र शामिल हैं, जो एक साथ मुक्ति की ओर ले जाते हैं।"},"219":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both the assertion and the reason are correct. Because tilling the soil inevitably leads to the death of insects and earthworms, strict adherence to Ahimsa made agriculture a restricted profession for Jains. Consequently, the trading and mercantile classes formed the bulk of its followers.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं। चूँकि मिट्टी जोतने से अनिवार्य रूप से कीड़ों और केंचुओं की मृत्यु हो जाती है, इसलिए अहिंसा के सख्त पालन ने कृषि को जैनियों के लिए एक प्रतिबंधित पेशा बना दिया। नतीजतन, व्यापारिक और वाणिज्यिक वर्गों ने इसके अनुयायियों का एक बड़ा हिस्सा बनाया।"},"220":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"All three statements are correct. Mahavira was born into an aristocratic family. His father headed the Jnatrika clan. His mother Trishala was a Lichchhavi princess. Chetaka's daughter Chellana was married to King Bimbisara of Magadha, making Mahavira well-connected to the Magadhan royalty.","explanation_hi":"तीनों कथन सही हैं। महावीर का जन्म एक कुलीन परिवार में हुआ था। उनके पिता ज्ञात्रिक वंश के मुखिया थे। उनकी माता त्रिशला लिच्छवी राजकुमारी थीं। चेटक की बेटी चेल्लना की शादी मगध के राजा बिंबिसार से हुई थी, जिससे महावीर मगध के शाही घराने से अच्छी तरह जुड़े हुए थे।"}}