{"196":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Makkhali Gosala founded the Ajivika sect. He was initially a companion of Mahavira for six years before a falling out. His philosophy, Niyativada (Fatalism), argued that everything in the universe is pre-determined and human effort cannot change destiny.","explanation_hi":"मक्खलि गोशाल ने आजीवक संप्रदाय की स्थापना की थी। वे शुरू में छह वर्षों तक महावीर के साथी थे। उनका दर्शन, नियतिवाद, यह तर्क देता था कि ब्रह्मांड में सब कुछ पूर्व-निर्धारित है और मानवीय प्रयास नियति को नहीं बदल सकते।"},"197":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. The transition to iron-plough agriculture in the Gangetic plains required saving cattle, directly contradicting the massive animal sacrifices in later Vedic rituals. Simultaneously, the Vaishyas, having gained economic power through trade, sought better social standing than the Brahmanical system allowed, hence heavily patronizing Buddhism and Jainism.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। गंगा के मैदानों में लोहे के हल वाली कृषि में मवेशियों को बचाने की आवश्यकता थी, जो उत्तर वैदिक कर्मकांडों में भारी पशु बलि के सीधे विपरीत था। इसके साथ ही, वैश्यों ने व्यापार के माध्यम से आर्थिक शक्ति प्राप्त कर ली थी और वे बेहतर सामाजिक स्थिति चाहते थे, इसलिए उन्होंने बौद्ध और जैन धर्म को भारी संरक्षण दिया।"},"198":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Ajita Kesakambali propagated Ucchedavada (Materialism), stating there is no afterlife. Purana Kassapa taught Akriyavada, believing actions have no moral consequences. Makkhali Gosala founded the Ajivikas based on Niyativada (Fatalism). Sanjaya Belatthiputta advocated Amaravikkhepavada (Agnosticism), refusing to give definite answers about karma or the afterlife.","explanation_hi":"अजित केशकंबली ने उच्छेदवाद (भौतिकवाद) का प्रचार किया। पूरण कस्सप ने अक्रियावाद सिखाया, यह मानते हुए कि कर्मों का कोई नैतिक परिणाम नहीं होता है। मक्खलि गोशाल ने नियतिवाद (भाग्यवादिता) के आधार पर आजीवकों की स्थापना की। संजय बेलट्ठिपुत्त ने अमराविक्खेपवाद (अज्ञेयवाद) की वकालत की।"},"199":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Buddhist text Brahmajala Sutta explicitly mentions 62 different philosophical sects (dittis) existing in India during the time of Gautama Buddha. In contrast, Jain texts like the Sutrakritanga mention 363 such heterodox sects, indicating extreme religious ferment.","explanation_hi":"बौद्ध ग्रंथ ब्रह्मजाल सुत्त स्पष्ट रूप से उल्लेख करता है कि गौतम बुद्ध के समय भारत में 62 विभिन्न दार्शनिक संप्रदाय (दृष्टि) मौजूद थे। इसके विपरीत, सूत्रकृतांग जैसे जैन ग्रंथ 363 ऐसे नास्तिक संप्रदायों का उल्लेख करते हैं, जो अत्यधिक धार्मिक उथल-पुथल का संकेत देते हैं।"},"200":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both the assertion and reason are correct. Mahavira and Buddha were both Kshatriyas. The Kshatriyas, holding political power, resented the highest social status claimed by Brahmanas through the complex Varna and ritual system. Buddhism and Jainism rejected Varna by birth, thus receiving robust Kshatriya backing.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं। महावीर और बुद्ध दोनों क्षत्रिय थे। राजनीतिक सत्ता रखने वाले क्षत्रियों ने जटिल वर्ण और कर्मकांड प्रणाली के माध्यम से ब्राह्मणों द्वारा दावा की गई सर्वोच्च सामाजिक स्थिति का विरोध किया। बौद्ध और जैन धर्म ने जन्म के आधार पर वर्ण को खारिज कर दिया, जिससे उन्हें क्षत्रियों का मजबूत समर्थन मिला।"},"201":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Satapatha Brahmana is a core Brahmanical (Vedic) text appended to the Shukla Yajurveda. In contrast, Anguttara Nikaya and Digha Nikaya are Buddhist texts, and the Bhagavati Sutra is a Jain text. These non-Brahmanical texts provide independent historical insight into the 6th-century BC republics and religious movements.","explanation_hi":"शतपथ ब्राह्मण एक मुख्य ब्राह्मणवादी (वैदिक) ग्रंथ है जो शुक्ल यजुर्वेद से जुड़ा है। इसके विपरीत, अंगुत्तर निकाय और दीघ निकाय बौद्ध ग्रंथ हैं, और भगवती सूत्र एक जैन ग्रंथ है। ये गैर-ब्राह्मणवादी ग्रंथ छठी शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व के गणराज्यों और धार्मिक आंदोलनों में स्वतंत्र ऐतिहासिक अंतर्दृष्टि प्रदान करते हैं।"},"202":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Statement 1 is incorrect because Charvaka (Lokayata) is a Nastika (heterodox) school that explicitly rejects the authority of the Vedas. Statements 2 and 3 are correct: it strictly accepts only Pratyaksha (perception) as a valid Pramana, rejecting inference, and denies the soul, karma, and afterlife.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 गलत है क्योंकि चार्वाक (लोकायत) एक नास्तिक स्कूल है जो वेदों के अधिकार को स्पष्ट रूप से खारिज करता है। कथन 2 और 3 सही हैं: यह सख्ती से केवल प्रत्यक्ष को एक वैध प्रमाण के रूप में स्वीकार करता है, अनुमान को खारिज करता है, और आत्मा, कर्म और पुनर्जन्म से इनकार करता है।"},"203":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Sramana (seeker or ascetic) tradition included various heterodox movements like Jainism, Buddhism, Ajivikas, and Charvakas. They were wandering ascetics who renounced worldly life, rejected the ultimate authority of the Vedas, and questioned the rigid Brahmanical social order.","explanation_hi":"श्रमण (साधक या तपस्वी) परंपरा में जैन, बौद्ध, आजीवक और चार्वाक जैसे विभिन्न नास्तिक आंदोलन शामिल थे। वे घुमंतू तपस्वी थे जिन्होंने सांसारिक जीवन को त्याग दिया, वेदों के अंतिम अधिकार को खारिज कर दिया, और कठोर ब्राह्मणवादी सामाजिक व्यवस्था पर सवाल उठाया।"},"204":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"In the context of the 6th century BC socio-economic changes, 'Gahapati' originally meant the head of a household, but in Buddhist texts, it specifically denoted wealthy landowners and prosperous merchants. This class was a major source of financial patronage for Buddhism and Jainism.","explanation_hi":"छठी शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व के सामाजिक-आर्थिक परिवर्तनों के संदर्भ में, 'गहपति' का मूल अर्थ परिवार का मुखिया था, लेकिन बौद्ध ग्रंथों में, यह विशेष रूप से धनी जमींदारों और समृद्ध व्यापारियों को दर्शाता था। यह वर्ग बौद्ध और जैन धर्म के लिए वित्तीय संरक्षण का एक प्रमुख स्रोत था।"},"205":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"According to historians like R.S. Sharma, the use of iron tools (2) cleared forests and improved deep ploughing, which led to a massive agricultural surplus (1). This surplus sustained non-agricultural populations, causing the rise of cities and trade (3). The wealthy traders (Vaishyas) then sought social elevation by patronizing new religions (4).","explanation_hi":"आर.एस. शर्मा जैसे इतिहासकारों के अनुसार, लोहे के औजारों (2) के उपयोग से जंगल साफ हुए और गहरी जुताई में सुधार हुआ, जिससे भारी कृषि अधिशेष (1) पैदा हुआ। इस अधिशेष ने गैर-कृषि आबादी को बनाए रखा, जिससे शहरों और व्यापार का उदय हुआ (3)। धनी व्यापारियों (वैश्यों) ने फिर नए धर्मों को संरक्षण देकर सामाजिक उत्थान की मांग की (4)।"}}