{"161":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In the Rig Veda, Vipas corresponds to the modern Beas river, Drishadvati to the Chautang (or Ghaggar), Gomati to the Gomal river, and Suvastu to the Swat river in present-day Pakistan.","explanation_hi":"ऋग्वेद में, विपाशा आधुनिक व्यास नदी से, दृषद्वती चौटांग (या घग्गर) से, गोमती गोमल नदी से, और सुवास्तु वर्तमान पाकिस्तान की स्वात नदी से मेल खाती है।"},"162":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect because Mandalas 1 and 10 are the youngest (latest additions) to the Rig Veda. Mandalas 2 to 7 are the oldest, known as the 'Family Books'.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि मंडल 1 और 10 ऋग्वेद में सबसे नए (बाद में जोड़े गए) हैं। मंडल 2 से 7 सबसे पुराने हैं, जिन्हें 'वंश मंडल' या 'पारिवारिक पुस्तकें' कहा जाता है।"},"163":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Agni was the second most important Rig Vedic god (invoked in 200 hymns). The assertion and reason are both true, and R perfectly explains why Agni held the position of an intermediary or 'priest of the gods'.","explanation_hi":"अग्नि ऋग्वेद के दूसरे सबसे महत्वपूर्ण देवता थे (200 सूक्तों में आवाहन किया गया)। दावा और कारण दोनों सत्य हैं, और R पूरी तरह से बताता है कि अग्नि ने मध्यस्थ या 'देवताओं के पुरोहित' का पद क्यों धारण किया।"},"164":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Varuna, the god of water and the sky, was the third most important Rig Vedic deity. He was the personification of 'Rita' (the universal cosmic and moral order) and punished those who committed sins or broke promises.","explanation_hi":"वरुण, जल और आकाश के देवता, तीसरे सबसे महत्वपूर्ण ऋग्वैदिक देवता थे। वे 'ऋत' (सार्वभौमिक लौकिक और नैतिक व्यवस्था) के अवतार थे और पाप करने वालों या वादे तोड़ने वालों को दंडित करते थे।"},"165":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Aitareya and Kaushitaki Brahmanas are attached to the Rig Veda. Shatapatha and Taittiriya belong to the Yajur Veda; Jaiminiya and Panchavimsha to the Sama Veda; and Gopatha belongs exclusively to the Atharva Veda.","explanation_hi":"ऐतरेय और कौषीतकि ब्राह्मण ऋग्वेद से जुड़े हैं। शतपथ और तैत्तिरीय यजुर्वेद के हैं; जैमिनीय और पंचविंश सामवेद के हैं; और गोपथ विशेष रूप से अथर्ववेद का है।"},"166":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statements 1 and 2 are correct. Statement 3 is incorrect because the Early Aryans lived in the Sapta Sindhu region. In the Rig Veda, the Ganga is mentioned only once, and the Yamuna is mentioned only thrice.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 और 2 सही हैं। कथन 3 गलत है क्योंकि प्रारंभिक आर्य सप्त सिंधु क्षेत्र में रहते थे। ऋग्वेद में गंगा का उल्लेख केवल एक बार और यमुना का उल्लेख केवल तीन बार हुआ है।"},"167":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Statement C is incorrect. The Rig Veda was NOT written down when composed. It was an oral tradition (Shruti), passed down meticulously from generation to generation by word of mouth for centuries before being committed to writing.","explanation_hi":"कथन C गलत है। ऋग्वेद को रचे जाने के समय लिखा नहीं गया था। यह एक मौखिक परंपरा (श्रुति) थी, जिसे सदियों तक एक पीढ़ी से दूसरी पीढ़ी तक मौखिक रूप से सावधानीपूर्वक पारित किया गया, उसके बाद इसे लिपिबद्ध किया गया।"},"168":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Indra (the most prominent god) was 'Purandara'; Soma was the god of plants and an intoxicating drink; Aditi was the universal mother goddess; and the Ashvins were the twin gods of dawn, health, and medicine.","explanation_hi":"इंद्र (सबसे प्रमुख देवता) 'पुरंदर' थे; सोम पौधों और नशीले पेय के देवता थे; अदिति सार्वभौमिक मातृ देवी थीं; और अश्विन भोर, स्वास्थ्य और चिकित्सा के जुड़वां देवता थे।"},"169":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"The Nasadiya Sukta is the 129th hymn of the 10th Mandala of the Rig Veda. It is highly celebrated for its philosophical depth, questioning how the universe was created and whether even the gods know its origin.","explanation_hi":"नासदीय सूक्त ऋग्वेद के 10वें मंडल का 129वां सूक्त है। यह अपनी दार्शनिक गहराई के लिए अत्यधिक प्रसिद्ध है, जो यह सवाल करता है कि ब्रह्मांड कैसे बना और क्या देवता भी इसकी उत्पत्ति जानते हैं।"},"170":{"correct_option":4,"explanation":"While male gods like Indra, Agni, and Varuna dominated, female deities like Usha (Dawn), Aditi (Mother of Gods), Prithvi (Earth), Saraswati (River), and Aranyani (Forest) were also invoked in the Rig Veda.","explanation_hi":"जबकि इंद्र, अग्नि और वरुण जैसे पुरुष देवताओं का प्रभुत्व था, ऋग्वेद में उषा (भोर), अदिति (देवताओं की माता), पृथ्वी, सरस्वती (नदी) और अरण्यानी (वन) जैसी महिला देवताओं का भी आवाहन किया गया था।"}}