{"316":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Pataliputra was strategically located at the confluence of the Ganga, Gandak, and Son rivers. This riverine location acted as a natural 'Jaladurga' (water fort), making it difficult for enemies to attack while simultaneously facilitating trade and communication.","explanation_hi":"पाटलिपुत्र रणनीतिक रूप से गंगा, गंडक और सोन नदियों के संगम पर स्थित था। इस नदी के स्थान ने एक प्राकृतिक 'जलदुर्ग' के रूप में कार्य किया, जिससे दुश्मनों के लिए हमला करना मुश्किल हो गया और साथ ही व्यापार और संचार में सुविधा हुई।"},"317":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Both statements are correct. Magadha's proximity to the rich iron ores of present-day Jharkhand gave them a definitive edge. They produced highly effective iron weapons and strong iron plowshares, which revolutionized their agriculture and military strength.","explanation_hi":"दोनों कथन सही हैं। वर्तमान झारखंड के समृद्ध लौह अयस्कों से मगध की निकटता ने उन्हें एक निश्चित बढ़त दी। उन्होंने अत्यधिक प्रभावी लोहे के हथियार और मजबूत लोहे के हल बनाए, जिसने उनकी कृषि और सैन्य शक्ति में क्रांति ला दी।"},"318":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are correct. Magadha was the first state in India to use elephants on a large scale in war. Unlike horses, elephants could easily navigate the marshy lands of eastern India and break down enemy fortifications.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सही हैं। मगध युद्ध में बड़े पैमाने पर हाथियों का उपयोग करने वाला भारत का पहला राज्य था। घोड़ों के विपरीत, हाथी पूर्वी भारत की दलदली भूमि को आसानी से पार कर सकते थे और दुश्मन की किलेबंदी को तोड़ सकते थे।"},"319":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Magadha was located on the periphery of the orthodox Aryan culture (Brahmanical core). It had a mixed population (including Kiratas and Magadhas). This lower influence of rigid orthodoxy made the society more dynamic, pragmatic, and open to ambitious, non-Kshatriya empire builders (like the Nandas).","explanation_hi":"मगध रूढ़िवादी आर्य संस्कृति (ब्राह्मणवादी कोर) की परिधि पर स्थित था। इसकी एक मिश्रित आबादी थी (जिसमें किरात और मगध शामिल थे)। कठोर रूढ़िवाद के इस कम प्रभाव ने समाज को अधिक गतिशील, व्यावहारिक और महत्वाकांक्षी, गैर-क्षत्रिय साम्राज्य निर्माताओं (जैसे नंदों) के लिए खुला बना दिया।"},"320":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Rajgriha was protected by five hills (ii). Chhotanagpur provided rich iron ores (iii). The Ganga river network was the highway of trade and transport (iv). The eastern forests supplied elephants for the military (i).","explanation_hi":"राजगृह पांच पहाड़ियों (ii) द्वारा संरक्षित था। छोटानागपुर ने समृद्ध लौह अयस्क (iii) प्रदान किए। गंगा नदी नेटवर्क व्यापार और परिवहन (iv) का राजमार्ग था। पूर्वी जंगलों ने सेना के लिए हाथियों की आपूर्ति की (i)।"},"321":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Ajatashatru utilized two novel weapons: 'Mahashilakantaka', a massive catapult that hurled heavy stones at enemy forts, and 'Rathamusala', a covered chariot with an attached swinging mace or blades that caused mass destruction in the enemy infantry.","explanation_hi":"अजातशत्रु ने दो नए हथियारों का उपयोग किया: 'महाशिलाकंटक', एक विशाल गुलेल जो दुश्मन के किलों पर भारी पत्थर फेंकता था, और 'रथमूसल', एक ढका हुआ रथ जिसमें एक झूलती हुई गदा या ब्लेड लगा होता था जो दुश्मन की पैदल सेना में भारी विनाश का कारण बनता था।"},"322":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; the fertile Gangetic basin and heavy rainfall produced the surplus food needed to feed a huge standing army. Statement 2 is entirely incorrect; Magadha actively used punch-marked coins (karshapanas), which greatly facilitated trade and taxation, boosting its wealth.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; उपजाऊ गंगा बेसिन और भारी वर्षा ने एक विशाल स्थायी सेना को खिलाने के लिए आवश्यक अतिरिक्त भोजन का उत्पादन किया। कथन 2 पूरी तरह से गलत है; मगध ने सक्रिय रूप से आहत सिक्कों (कार्षापण) का उपयोग किया, जिसने व्यापार और कराधान को बहुत सुगम बनाया, जिससे इसकी संपत्ति में वृद्धि हुई।"},"323":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Both Assertion and Reason are true, and R correctly explains A. A professional standing army requires constant funding and food. The agricultural boom (due to iron plows and fertile soil) allowed Magadhan kings to collect high taxes in cash and kind, making a permanent military possible.","explanation_hi":"कथन और कारण दोनों सत्य हैं, और R सही ढंग से A की व्याख्या करता है। एक पेशेवर स्थायी सेना को निरंतर धन और भोजन की आवश्यकता होती है। कृषि बूम (लोहे के हल और उपजाऊ मिट्टी के कारण) ने मगध के राजाओं को नकद और वस्तु के रूप में उच्च कर एकत्र करने की अनुमति दी, जिससे एक स्थायी सेना संभव हो गई।"},"324":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct; the five hills made Rajgriha almost impregnable to enemy sieges. Statement 2 is incorrect on two counts: Pataliputra was founded by Udayin (not Bimbisara), and it was located far inland on the Ganga river to control riverine trade, not maritime trade on the Arabian Sea.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है; पांच पहाड़ियों ने राजगृह को दुश्मन की घेराबंदी के लिए लगभग अभेद्य बना दिया। कथन 2 दो मायनों में गलत है: पाटलिपुत्र की स्थापना उदायिन (बिंबिसार नहीं) द्वारा की गई थी, और यह नदी व्यापार को नियंत्रित करने के लिए गंगा नदी पर अंतर्देशीय स्थित था, न कि अरब सागर पर समुद्री व्यापार के लिए।"},"325":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"Option 2 is NOT correct. During its early rise (6th to 4th century BC), Magadha was an inland empire centered in modern-day Bihar. It controlled the riverine trade of the Ganges, but it did not have a monopoly over the oceanic trade through the western ports of Gujarat; that region was far beyond its initial borders.","explanation_hi":"विकल्प 2 सही नहीं है। अपने प्रारंभिक उत्कर्ष (6वीं से 4थी शताब्दी ईसा पूर्व) के दौरान, मगध आधुनिक बिहार में केंद्रित एक अंतर्देशीय साम्राज्य था। इसने गंगा के नदी व्यापार को नियंत्रित किया, लेकिन गुजरात के पश्चिमी बंदरगाहों के माध्यम से समुद्री व्यापार पर इसका एकाधिकार नहीं था; वह क्षेत्र इसकी प्रारंभिक सीमाओं से बहुत दूर था।"}}