{"326":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"Sir William Jones, the founder of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, first identified Sandrokottos of the Greek texts (like those of Justin and Strabo) with Chandragupta Maurya in 1793, fixing a firm chronological anchor for ancient Indian history.","explanation_hi":"एशियाटिक सोसाइटी ऑफ बंगाल के संस्थापक सर विलियम जोंस ने 1793 में सबसे पहले यूनानी ग्रंथों (जैसे जस्टिन और स्ट्रैबो के) के सेंड्रोकोटस की पहचान चंद्रगुप्त मौर्य के रूप में की थी, जिसने प्राचीन भारतीय इतिहास के लिए एक ठोस कालानुक्रमिक आधार तय किया।"},"327":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"After defeating Seleucus, a peace treaty was signed. Seleucus surrendered vast territories in the North-West (modern Afghanistan and Balochistan) and gave his daughter in marriage. In return, Chandragupta gifted him 500 elephants which Seleucus used effectively in the Battle of Ipsus.","explanation_hi":"सेल्यूकस को हराने के बाद एक शांति संधि पर हस्ताक्षर किए गए। सेल्यूकस ने उत्तर-पश्चिम (आधुनिक अफगानिस्तान और बलूचिस्तान) में विशाल क्षेत्रों को सौंप दिया और अपनी बेटी की शादी कर दी। बदले में, चंद्रगुप्त ने उन्हें 500 हाथी उपहार में दिए जिनका उपयोग सेल्यूकस ने इप्सस के युद्ध में किया था।"},"328":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"The Saptanga theory in the Arthashastra lists the 7 limbs of a state as Swami (King), Amatya (Ministers/Officials), Janapada (Territory/People), Durga (Fort), Kosha (Treasury), Danda (Army), and Mitra (Ally).","explanation_hi":"अर्थशास्त्र में सप्तांग सिद्धांत राज्य के 7 अंगों को स्वामी (राजा), अमात्य (मंत्री/अधिकारी), जनपद (क्षेत्र/लोग), दुर्ग (किला), कोष (राजकोष), दंड (सेना) और मित्र (सहयोगी) के रूप में सूचीबद्ध करता है।"},"329":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"'Mudrarakshasa' (The Signet Ring of Rakshasa) was written by Vishakhadatta during the Gupta period. It provides a detailed, dramatized account of how Chanakya outwitted Rakshasa, the loyal minister of the Nandas, to establish Mauryan rule.","explanation_hi":"'मुद्राराक्षस' गुप्त काल के दौरान विशाखदत्त द्वारा लिखा गया था। यह विस्तृत और नाट्य रूपांतरित विवरण प्रदान करता है कि कैसे चाणक्य ने मौर्य शासन स्थापित करने के लिए नंदों के वफादार मंत्री राक्षस को मात दी।"},"330":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"According to Jain tradition, a massive 12-year famine struck Magadha. Chandragupta abdicated in favor of his son Bindusara, accompanied Bhadrabahu to Karnataka (Shravanabelagola), and died by the strict Jain ascetic practice of Sallekhana (voluntary starvation).","explanation_hi":"जैन परंपरा के अनुसार, मगध में 12 साल का भयंकर अकाल पड़ा। चंद्रगुप्त ने अपने बेटे बिंदुसार के पक्ष में पदत्याग कर दिया, भद्रबाहु के साथ कर्नाटक (श्रवणबेलगोला) गए, और संलेखना (स्वैच्छिक भुखमरी) की सख्त जैन तपस्या प्रथा द्वारा अपना शरीर त्याग दिया।"},"331":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Arthashastra explicitly divides courts into two main categories. Dharmasthiya (civil courts) dealt with disputes between individuals. Kantakasodhana (removal of thorns) were criminal courts dealing with state offenses, murder, and treason.","explanation_hi":"अर्थशास्त्र स्पष्ट रूप से अदालतों को दो मुख्य श्रेणियों में विभाजित करता है। धर्मस्थीय (दीवानी अदालतें) व्यक्तियों के बीच विवादों से निपटती थीं। कंटकशोधन आपराधिक (फौजदारी) अदालतें थीं जो राज्य के अपराधों, हत्या और राजद्रोह से निपटती थीं।"},"332":{"correct_option":2,"explanation":"The Arthashastra ('Science of Wealth/Politics') is a secular, pragmatic manual for rulers. It details state administration, revenue collection, espionage, diplomacy (Mandala theory), and warfare, strictly separating statecraft from religious morality.","explanation_hi":"अर्थशास्त्र ('धन/राजनीति का विज्ञान') शासकों के लिए एक धर्मनिरपेक्ष, व्यावहारिक मैनुअल है। यह राज्य प्रशासन, राजस्व संग्रह, जासूसी, कूटनीति (मंडल सिद्धांत) और युद्ध का विवरण देता है, जो राज्यकला को धार्मिक नैतिकता से सख्ती से अलग करता है।"},"333":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"Statement 1 is correct. Statement 2 is entirely reversed: 'Sanstha' (stationary) were spies embedded in one place (like merchants or ascetics), while 'Sanchara' (wandering) were mobile spies roaming the empire to gather intelligence.","explanation_hi":"कथन 1 सही है। कथन 2 पूरी तरह से उल्टा है: 'संस्था' (स्थिर) एक ही स्थान (जैसे व्यापारी या तपस्वी) पर तैनात जासूस थे, जबकि 'संचार' (घुमंतू) खुफिया जानकारी इकट्ठा करने के लिए साम्राज्य में घूमने वाले मोबाइल जासूस थे।"},"334":{"correct_option":1,"explanation":"In Mauryan administration, Sita-adhyaksha managed the 'Sita' (crown lands/agriculture). The Samaharta was the highest revenue collector. Sannidhata was the chief custodian of the treasury. Panyadhyaksha regulated trade and commerce.","explanation_hi":"मौर्य प्रशासन में, सीताध्यक्ष 'सीता' (राजकीय भूमि/कृषि) का प्रबंधन करता था। समाहर्ता सर्वोच्च राजस्व संग्राहक था। सन्निधाता राजकोष का मुख्य संरक्षक था। पण्याध्यक्ष व्यापार और वाणिज्य को नियंत्रित करता था।"},"335":{"correct_option":3,"explanation":"The Mandala (circle of states) theory is based on the geopolitical premise that an immediate neighbor ('Ari') is a natural enemy, and the neighbor's neighbor ('Mitra') is a natural ally. The central king seeking expansion is called 'Vijigishu'.","explanation_hi":"मंडल (राज्यों का चक्र) सिद्धांत भू-राजनीतिक आधार पर आधारित है कि एक तत्काल पड़ोसी ('अरि') एक प्राकृतिक दुश्मन है, और पड़ोसी का पड़ोसी ('मित्र') एक प्राकृतिक सहयोगी है। विस्तार चाहने वाले केंद्रीय राजा को 'विजिगीषु' कहा जाता है।"}}